
<div class="page"><div class="seq">page 206</div><p class="text">b.
the second letter of the english alphabet, is pro-
nounced as in most other european languages, by
pressing the whole length of the lips together, and
o forcing them open with a strong breath. it has a
9 near affinity with the other labial letters, and is con-
founded by the germans with p, and by the gascons with /;
from which an epigrammatist remarks, that bibere and vivere
are in gascony the same. the spaniards, in most words, use
b or w indifferently.
baa. m. s. [see the verb.] the cry of a sheep.
—therefore thou art a sheep
such another proof would make me cry had.
to baa. v. n. [balo, lat..] to cry like a sheep.
or like a lamb, whose dam away is fet,
he treble baas, for help, but none can get. sidney.
to ba bble. v. n. [babbelen, germ. babiller, fr.]
1. to prattle like a child; to prate imperfectly.
my babbling praises i repeat no more,
but hear, rejoice, stand silent, and adore. prior.
2. to talk idly, or irrationally.
john had conned over a catalogue of hard words; these he
used to babble indifferently in all companies. arbuthnot.
let the silent sanctuary show,
what from the babbling schools we may not know. prior.
3. to talk thoughtlessly; to tell secrets.
there is more danger in a reserved and silent friend, than
in a noisy babbling enemy. l'estrange.
4. to talk much.
the babbling echo mocks the hounds,
replying shrilly to the well tun’d horns,
as if a double hunt were heard at once. shakspeare.
and had i pow'r to give that knowledge birth,
in all the speeches of the babbling earth. prior.
the babbling echo had descry’d his face;
she, who in other’s words her silence breaks. addison.
ba'bble. m. s. [babil, fr.] idle talk; senseless prattle.
this babble shall not henceforth trouble me;
here is a coil with protestation
come, no more,
this is meer moral babble. milton.
with volleys of eternal babble,
and clamour more unanswerable. hudibras.
the babble, impertinence, and folly, i have taken notice
of in disputes. glanville.
ba(bblement. m. s. [from babble.] senseless prate; empty
words.
deluded all this while with ragged notions and babblements,
while they expected worthy and delightful knowledge. milton.
ba/bbler. m. s. [from babble.]
1. an idle talker; an irrational prattler.
we hold our time too precious to be spent
with such a babbler. shakoshcare.
the apostle had no sooner proposed it to the masters at a-
thens, but he himself was ridiculed as a babbler. rogers.
2. a teller of secrets.
utterers of secrets he from thence debarr'd ;
babblers of folly, and blazers of crime. fairy queen.
great babblers, or talkers, are not fit for trust. l'e/irange.
babe. m. s. [baban, welch ; babbaerd, dutch..] an infant;
a child of either sex.
those that do teach your babes,
do it with gentle means; and easy tasks;
he might have chid me so: for, in good faith,
i am a child to chiding.
nor shall sebastian's formidable name
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
be longer us'd, to lull the crying babe. dryden.
the babe had all that infant care beguiles,
and early knew his mother in her smiles. dryden.
ba'bery. n.s.. [from babe..] finery to please a babe or child.
so have i seen trim books in velvet dight,
with golden leaves and painted babery
of seely boys, please unacquainted sight. sidney.
ba'bish. adj. [from babe.] childish.
if he be bashful, and will soon blush, they call him a bolish
and ill brought up thing. ascham.
babo’on. n.s.. [babouin, fr. it is supposed by skinner to be the
augmentation of babe, and to import a great babe..] a monkey
of the largest kind.
you had looked through the grate like a geminy of ba-
boons. shakespeare.
he cast every human feature out of his countenance, and
became a baboon. aldison.
b a c
ba'by. m. s. [see babe.]
1. a child; an infant.
the baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
goes all decorum. shakespeare.
the child must have sugar plums, rather than make the
poor baby cry. locke.
he must marry, and propagate: the father cannot stay for
the portion, nor the mother for babes to play with. locke.
2. a small image in imitation of a child, which girls play
with.
the archduke saw that perkin would prove a runnagate;
and it was the part of children to fall out about babies. bacon.
since no image can represent the great creator, never think
to honour him by your foolish puppets, and babies of dirt and
clay. stillingfiret.
ba'ccated. adj. [baccatus, lat.] beset with pearls; having
many berries. dic.
bacchana l1a n. m. s. [from bacchanalia, lat.] a riotous
person; a drunkard.
bacchan als. n.s.. [bacchanalia, lat.] the drunken feasts and
revels of bacchus, the god of wine.
ha, my brave emperor, shall we dance now the egyptian
bacchana's, and celebrate our drink shakspeare.
what wild fury was there in the heathen bacchanasi, which
we have not seen equalled decay of piety.
both extremes were banish’d from their walls,
carthusian fasts, and fulsome bacchanals. pope.
bacchus bol. e. m. s. a flower not tall, but very full and
broad-leaved. mortimer.
bacci'ferous. adj. [from bacca, a berry, and fero, to bear,
lat.) berry-bearing.
bacciferous trees are of four kinds.
1. such as bear a caliculate or naked berry; the flower and ca-
lix both failing off together, and leaving the berry bare; as
the sassafras trees.
2. such as have a naked monospermous fruit, that is, contain-
ing in it only one seed; as the arbutes.
3. such as have but polyspermous fruit, that is, containing two or
more kernels or seeds within it; as the jesminum, ligust run.
4. such as have their fruit composed of many acini, or round
soft balls set close together like a bunch of grapes; as the uva
marina. ray.
bacci'vorous. adj. [from bacca, a berry, and voro, to devour,
lat..] devouring berries. dic7.
ba'chelor. m. s. [this is a word of very uncertain etymology,
it not being well known what was its original sense. junius
derives it from 32xnxo, foolish; menage, from bas chevalier,
a knight of the lowest rank; spelman, from baculus, a staff;
cufas, from buccella, an allowance of provision. the most pro-
bable derivation seems to be from bacca laurus, the berry of a
laurel or bay; bachelors being young, are of good hopes, like
laurels in the berry. dr. lawrence observed, that monage's
etymology is much confirmed by the practice in our universi-
ties of calling a bachelor, sir. in latin, baccalaureus.]
1. a man unmarried.
such separation
becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid. shakespeare.
the haunting of dissolute places, or resort to courtesans,
are no more punished in married men than in bachelors. bacon.
a true painter naturally delights in the liberty which be-
longs to the bachelor's estate. dryden.
let sinful bachelors their woes deplore,
full well they merit all they feel, and more. pope.
2. a man who takes his first degrees at the university in any
profession.
being a boy, new bachelor of arts, i chanced to speak against
the pope. ascham.
i appear before your honour, in behalf of martinus scrible-
rus, bachelor of physic. asa, t. scriblerus.
3. a knight of the lowest order. this is a sense now lit le used.
ba'chelors.h.i.p. m. s. [from bachelor.] the condition of a
bachelor.
her mother, living yet, can testify,
she was the first fruit of my bachelorship.
back. m. s. [bac, baec, sax. bach, germ.]
1. the hinder part of the body, from the neck to the thighs.
part following enter, part remain withou",
and mount on others backs, in hopes to share. dryon.
2. the outer part of the hand when it is shut : opposed to the
alon.
p methought love pitying me, when he saw this,
gave me your hand, the backs and palais to kiss. donne.
3. the
shałzears.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 207</div><p class="text">b a c
b a c
3. the outward part of the body; that which requires clothes;
opposed to the belly.
those who, by their ancestors, have been set free from a
constant drudgery to their backs and their bellies, should bestow
some time on their heads. locke.
4. the rear : opposed to the van.
he might conclude, that walter would be upon the king's
back, as his majesty was upon his. clarendon.
5. the place behind.
as the voice goeth round, as well towards the back as to-
wards the front of him that speaketh, so does the echo: for you
have many back echoes to the place where you stand. bacon.
antheus, sergestus grave, cleanthus strong,
and at their backs a mighty trojan throng. dryden.
6. the part of any thing out of fight.
trces set upon the backs of chimnies do ripen fruit sooner.
bacon's nat. hisł.
7. the thick part of any tool opposed to the edge; as the back
of a knife or sword; whence bassword, or sword with a
back; as,
bull dreaded not old lewis either at bacosword, fingle faul-
chion, or cudgel-play. arbuthnot.
8. to turn the back on one; to forsake him, or neglect him.
at the hour of death, all friendships of the world bid him
adieu, and the whole creation turns its back upon him. south.
9. to turn the lack; to go away; to be not within the reach
of taking cognizance.
his back was no sooner turned, but they returned to their
former rebellion. sir j. davies.
back. adv. [from the noun.]
1. to the place from which one came.
back you shall not to the house, unless
you undertake that with me. shakespeare.
he sent many to seek the ship argo, threatening that if they
brought not back medea, they should suffer in her stead.
raleigh's history of the iworld.
where they are, and why they came not back,
is now the labour of my thoughts.
back to thy native island might'st thou sail,
and leave half-heard the melancholy tale.
2. backward; as retreating from the present station.
i’ve been surprised in an unguarded hour,
but must not now go back; the love that lay
half smother'd in my breast, has broke through all
its weak restraints.
3. behind; not coming forward.
i thought to promote thee unto great honour; but lo the
lord hath kept thee back from honour. numb. xxiv. i 1.
constrain the glebe, keep back the hurtful weed. blackmore.
4. towards things past.
i had always a curiosity to look back unto the sorrows of
things, and to view in my mind the beginning and progress of
a rising world. burnet.
• 5. again; in return.
the lady's mad; yet if 'twere so,
she could not sway her house, command her followers,
take and give back affairs, and their dispatch,
with such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing. shakesp.
6. again; a second time.
this caesar found, and that ungrateful age, ,
with losing him, went back to blood and rage. jwaller.
the epistles being written from ladies forsaken by their lov-
ers, many thoughts came back upon us in divers letters. dryd.
to back. v. a. [from the noun back.]
1. to mount on the back of a horse.
that roan shall be my throne.
well i will back him strait. o esperance 1
bid butler lead him forth into the park. shakespeare.
2. to break a horse; to train him to bear upon his back.
direct us how to back the winged horse;
favour his flight, and moderate his course.
3. to place upon the back.
as i slept, methought,
great jupiter, upon his eagle back'd,
appear'd to me. shakespeare.
4. to maintain; to strengthen ; to support ; to defend.
r belike, he means,
back'd by the pow'r of warwick, that false peer,
t” aspire unto the crown. shakespeare.
- you are strait enough in the shoulders, you care not who
sees your back; call you that backing of your friends? a plague
upon such backing! give me them that will face me. shakesp.
these were seconded by certain demilaunces, and both
milton.
pope.
addison.
rosommon.
backed with men at arms. sir j. hayward.
did they not swear, in express words,
to prop and back the house of lords :
and after turn'd out the whole houseful. hudibras.
a great malice, back'd with a great interest, can have no
advantage of a man, but from his expectations of something
without himself. south.
how shall we treat this bold aspiring man
success still follows him, and backs his crimes. addison.
5. to justify; to support.
the patrons of the termary number of principles, and those
that would have five elements, endeavour to back their experi-
ments with a specious reason. boyle.
we have i know not how many adages to back the reason
of this moral.
l'estrange.
6. to second.
factious, and fav'ring this or t'other side,
their wagers back their wishes. dryden.
to backbite. v. a. [from back and bite.] to censure or re-
proach the absent.
most untruly and maliciously do these evil tongues backbite
and slander the sacred ashes of that personage. spenser.
i will use him well; a friend i' th' court is better than a
penny in purse.... use his men well, davy, for they are arrant
knaves, and will backbite. shakespeare.
ba'ckpite r. m. s. [from backbite.] a privy calumniator; a
censurer of the absent.
no body is bound to look upon his backliter, or his under-
miner, his betrayer, or his oppressor, as his friend. south.
ba'ck bon e. m. s. [from back and bone..] the bone of the back.
the backbone should be divided into many vertebres for com-
modious bending, and not to be one entire rigid bone. ray.
ba'ckcarry. having on the back.
manwood, in his forest laws, noteth it for one of the four
circumstances, or cases, wherein a forester may arrest an of-
fender against vert or venison in the forest, viz. stable-stand,
dog-draw, backcarry, and bloody hand. cowel.
ba'ckdoor. m. s. [from back and door.] the door behind the
house; privy passage.
the procession durst not return by the way it came; but,
after the devotion of the monks, passed out at a backdoor of the
convent. addison.
popery, which is so far shut out as not to re-enter openly,
is stealing in by the backdoor of atheism. atterbury.
ba'cked. adj. [from back..] having a back.
lofty-neck'd,
sharp-headed, barrel-belly'd, broadly back'd. dryden;
ba'ckfriend. m. s. [from back and friend..] a friend back-
wards; that is, an enemy in secret.
set the restless importunities of talebearers and backfriends
against fair words and professions. l’estrange.
far is our church from incroaching upon the civil power;
as some who are backfriends to both, would maliciously insi-
nuate. - south.
backga'mmon. m. s. [from bach gammon,welch, a little battle.]
a play or game at tables, with box and dice.
in what esteem are you with the vicar of the parish can
you play with him at backgammon f swift.
backhouse. m. s. [from back and house.] the buildings be-
hind the chief part of the house.
their backhouses, of more necessary than cleanly service, as
kitchens, stables, are climbed up unto by steps. carew.
ba'ckpiece. n.s.. [from back and piece.] the piece of armour
which covers the back.
the morning that he was to join battle, his armourer put
on his backpiece before, and his breastplate behind. camden.
ba'ckroom. n.s.. [from back and room..] a room behind; not
in the front. -
if you have a fair prospect backwards of gardens, it may be
convenient to make backrooms the larger. mox. mech. exerc.
ba'cks ide. m. s. [from back and side.]
1. the hinder part of anything.
if the quicksilver were rubbed from the backside of the spe-
culum, the glass would cause the same rings of colours, but
more faint; the phaenomena depend not upon the quicksilver,
unless so far as it encreases the reflection of the backside of the
glass. newton.
2. the hind part of an animal.
a poor ant carries a grain of corn, climbing up a wall with
her head downwards and her backside upwards. addison.
3. the yard or ground behind a house.
the wash of pastures, fields, commons, roads, streets, or
backsides, are of great advantage to all sorts of land. martimer.
to backsl1 de. v. n. [from back and slide.] to fall off; to
apostatize : a word only used by divines.
hast thou seen that which backsliding israel hath done she
is gone up upon every high mountain, and under every green
tree. jeremiah.
backsl1 der. n. s. [from backslide.] an apostate.
the backslider in heart shall be filled. proverbs.
ba'ckstaff. n.s. [from back and staff; because, in taking an
observation, the observer's back is turned towards the sun.]
an instrument useful in taking the sun's altitude at sea; in-
vented by captain davies.
ba'ckstairs. n. s. [from back and stairs..] the private stairs
in the house.
i condemn the practice which hath lately crept into the court
at the backstairs, that some pricked for sheriffs get out of the
bill. bacon.
ba'ckstays. m. s. [from back and slay.] ropes or stays which
keep the masts of a ship from pitching forward or wo.
a c k-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 208</div><p class="text">b a c
b a f
-
ba'cksword. m. s. [from back and sword..] a sword with one
sharp edge.
bull dreaded not old lewis at backsword. arbuthnot.
ba'ckw ar d. 7 adv. [from back and pearb, sax. that is, to-
£o.; wards the back.]
i. with the back forwards.
they went lackward, and their faces were backward. gen.
2. towards the back.
in leaping with weights, the arms are first cast backwards,
and then forwards, with so much the greater force; for the
hands go backward before they take their rise. bacon.
3. on the back.
then darting from her malignant eyes, -
she cast him backward as he strove to rise. dryden.
4. from the present station to the place beyond the back.
we might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
and beat them backward home. shakspeare.
the monstrous sight
struck them with horrour lackward; but far worse
urg'd them behind.
5. regressively.
are not the rays of light, in passing by the edges and sides
of bodies, bent several times backwards and forwards with a
motion like that of an eel? newton.
6. towards something past.
to prove the possibility of a thing, there is no argument to
that which looks lackwards; for what has been done or suf-
milton.
fered, may certainly be done or suffered again. south,
7. out of the progressive state; reflex.
no, doubtless; for the mind can backward cast
upon herself, her understanding light. sir j. davies.
8. from a letter to a worse state.
the work went backward; and the more he strove
to advance the suit, the farther from her love. dryden.
9. past; in time past.
they have spread one of the worst languages in the world,
if we look upon it some reigns backward. locke.
10. perversely; from the wrong end.
i never yet saw man,
but she would spell him backward; if fair-fac'd,
she'd swear the gentleman should be her sisłcr;
if black, why, nature, drawing of an antick,
made a foul blot; if tall, a launce ill-headed.
ba'ckw ar d. adj.
1. unwilling; averse.
our mutability makes the friends of our nation backward to
engage with us in alliances. addison.
we are strangely backward to lay hold of this safe, this only
method of cure. atterbury.
cities laid waste, they storm'd the dens and caves;
for wifer brutes are backward to be slaves.
2. hesitating.
all things are ready, if our minds be so:
perish the man, whose mind is backward now. shakespeare.
3. sluggish; dilatory.
the mind is backward to undergo the fatigue of weighing
every argument. //atts.
4. dull; not quick or apprehensive.
it often falls out, that the backward learner makes amends
another way. south.
5. late; coming aster something else: as, backward fruits: back-
ward c...idren: fruits long in ripening; children slow of
growth.
b.a(c1. ward. m. s. the things or state behind or past; poetical.
what seest thou else
in the dark backward or abysm of time *
ba'ckw ardly. adv. [from backward.]
1. unwiłłingly; aversely; with the back forward.
like numid lions by the hunters chas'd,
though they do fly, yet backwardly do go
with proud aspest, disdaining greater hasle.
2. perversely; or with cold hope.
i was the first man
that e'er receiv'd gift from him ;
and does he think so backwardly of me,
that i’ll requite it last :
ba'ckw ardnfss. n. s. [from backward.]
1. dulness; unwillingness; sluggishness.
the thing by which we are apt to excuse our backwardnes;
to good works, is the ill success that hath been observed to at-
tend well designing charities. atterbury.
2. slowness of progression; tardiness.
ba'co n. m. s. [probably from baken, that is, dried flesh.]
1. the flesh of a hog salted and dried.
high o'er the hearth a chine of bacon hung,
good old philemon seiz'd it with a prong,
then cut a slice. dryden.
2. to save the lacon, is a phrase for preserving one's self from
being hurt; borrowed from the care of housewives in the
country, where they have seldom any other provision in the
house than dric d bacon, to secure it from the marching sol-
diers.
shakesp.
pope.
shakespeare.
sidney.
shakespeare.
what fightens you thus my good son says the priest;
you murder'd, are sorry, and have been confest.
q father! my sorrow will scarce save my bacon;
for 'twas not that i murder'd, but that i was taken. prior.
baculo'metry. m. s. [from baculus, lat. and fairgow.] the
art of measuring distances by one or more staves. dicf.
bad. adj. [quaad, dutch; compar. worse; superl. wors.]
1. ill; not good; a general word used in regard to physical or
moral faults, either of men or things.
most men have politicks enough to make, through violence,
the best scheme of government a bad one. pate.
2. vicious ; corrupt. 4.
thou may’s repent,
and one bad act, with many deeds well done,
may'st cover. milton.
thus will the latter, as the former, world
still tend from bad to worse. milton.
our unhappy fates
mix thee amongst the bad, or make thee run
too near the paths, which virtue bids thee shun. prizr.
3. unfortunate ; unhappy.
the sun his annual course obliquely made,
good days contracted, and enlarg’d the bad. dryor:
4. hurtful; unwholesome ; mischievous; pernicious: with fr.
reading was bad for his eyes, writing made his head ake. add.
5. sick: with of ; as, bad of a fever.
bad. } the preterite of bid.
bade. -
and for an earnest of greater honour,
he bade me, from him, call thee thane of cawder. shakes,
badge. m. s. [a word of uncertain etymology; derived by ji-
nius from bode or bade, a messenger; and supposed to be dor-
rupted from badage, the credential of a messenger; but taken
by skinner and 4/inshow from bagghe, dut. a jewel, or lague,
a ring, fr. it seems to come from bajulo, to carry, lat.)
i. a mark or cognizance worn to shew the relation of the
wearer to any person or thing.
but on his breast a bloody cross he bore,
the dear resemblance of his dying lord;
for whose sweet sake that glorious badge he wore. soosz.
the outward splendour of his office, is the la 'ge and toker
of that sacred character which he inwardly bears. alterbury.
2. a token by which one is known.
a savage tygress on her helmet lies;
the famous badge clarinda us’d to bear. fairs.”.
3. the mark or token of any thing.
there appears much joy in him; even so much, that joy
could not shew itself modest enough, without a badge of bio-
terness. shakespeare.
sweet mercy is nobility's true badge. shakspeare.
let him not bear the badges of a wreck,
nor beg with a blue table on his back. ixryden.
to bang e. v. a. [from the noun..] to mark as with a badge.
your royal father's murder'd
oh, by whom
those of his chamber, as it seem’d, had don't ;
their hands and faces were all badg’d with blood,
so were their daggers. shakes care.
ba do er. m. s. [bedour, fr. melis.] an animal that earths in
the ground, used to he hunted.
that a brock, or badger, hath legs of one side shorter than
the other, is received not only by theorists and unexperienced
believers, but most who behold them daily. brown.
ba'dger-legged. adj. [from badger and logged.] having legs
of an unequal length, as the badger is supposed to have.
his body crooked all over, big-bellied, badger-legged, and
his complexion swarthy. l’estrange.
ba'dger. m. s. [perhaps from the latin bajulus, a carrier; but,
by junius, derived from the badger, a creature who stows up
his provision.] one that buys corn and victuals in one place,
and carries it unto another. cowes.
ba'dly. adv. [from bad j in a bad manner; not well.
how goes the day with us? o tell me, hubert.—
badly, i fear. how fares your majesty shakeshcare.
ba‘dn ess. m. s. [from bad.) want of good qualities, either na-
tural or moral; desert; depravity.
it was not your brother's evil disposition made him seek his
death; but a provoking merit, set a work by a reproveable
badness in himself. shakespeare.
there is one convenience in this city, which makes some
amends for the badness of the pavement. ziddison on italy.
i did not see how the badmos of the weather could be the
king's fault. a di on.
to ba/f fle. v. a. [heffier, fr.]
1. to elude; to make ineffectual.
they made a shift to think themselves guiltless, in spite of
, all their sins; to break the precept, and at the same time to
baffe the curse. s uto.
he hath deserved to have the grace withdrawn, which he
hath so long baffled and defied. alteriory.
2. to confound; to defeat with some confusion, as by perplex-
ing or amusing ; to baffle is sometimes less than to cons wer.
etruria
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 209</div><p class="text">b a g
b a i
o
&amp;
o
o
r
etruria lost,
he brings to turnus' aid his baffei host. dryden.
he heard a bagpipe, and saw a general animated with the
found. addison's freeholder.
when the mind has brought itself to close thinking, it may bag proper. n.s. [from bagpipe.] one that plays on a bagpipe.
go on roundly. every abstruse problem, every intricate ques-
tion will not lefte, discourage, or break it. locke.
some that will evermore peep thro' their eyes,
and laugh, like parrots, at a bagpiper. shakespeare.
a foreign potentate trembles at a war with the english na- baguette. n.s. [fr. a term of architecture.] a little round
tion, ready to employ against him such revenues as shall baffe
his designs upon their country. addison.
baff le. m. s. [from the verb...] a defeat.
it is the skill of the disputant that keeps of a base. south.
the authors having missed of their aims, are fain to retreat
with frustration and a baffe. south.
baffler. m. s. [from bayle..] he that puts to confusion, or
moulding, less than an astragal; sometimes carved and en-
riched.
to barone. v. a. [bagner, fr.] to drench ; to soak: a word
out of use.
the women forslow not to baigns them, unless they plead
their heels, with a worse perfume than jugurth found in the
dungeon. carew's survey of cornwall.
defeats. bail. m. s. [of this word the etymologists give many deriva-
experience, that great baffler of speculation, assures us the
thing is too possible, and brings, in all ages, matter of fact to
confute our suppositions. government of the tongue.
bag. m. s. [bel3e, sax. from whence perhaps by dropping, as is
usual, the harsh consonant, came bege, bage, bag..]
i. a sack, or pouch, to put any thing in, as money, corn.
cousin, away for england; haste before,
and, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags
of hoarding abbots; their imprison’d angels
set thou at liberty. shakespeare.
what is it that opens thy mouth in praises is it that thy
bags and thy barns are full south.
waters were inclosed within the earth as in a bag. burnet.
once, we confess, beneath the patriot's cloak,
from the crack'd bag the dropping guinea spoke. pope.
2. that part of animals in which some particular juices are con-
tained, as the poison of vipers.
the swelling poison of the several se&amp;s,
which, wanting vent, the nation's health infects,
shall burst its bag. dryden,
sing on, sing on, for i can ne'er be cloy'd;
so may thy cows their burden’d bags distend. dryden.
3. an ornamental purse of silk tied to men's hair.
we saw a young fellow riding towards us full gallop, with
a bob wig and black filken bag tied to it. addison.
4. a term used to signify different quantities of certain commo-
dities ; as, a bag of pepper ; a bag of hops.
to bag. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to put into a bag.
accordingly he drain'd those marshy grounds,
and bagg’d them in a blue cloud. dryden.
hops ought not to be bagg’d up hot. mortimer.
2. to load with a bag.
like a bee lagg'd with his honey'd venom,
he brings it to your bive. dryden's don sebassian.
to bag. v. n. to swell like a full bag.
the skin seemed much contracted, yet it lagged, and had a
porringer full of matter in it. jwiseman.
two kids that in the valley stray'd,
i found by chance, and to my fold convey'd :
they drain two bagging udders every day. dryden.
ba’gatelle. m. s. [bagatelle, fr.] a trifle ; a thing of no
importance : a word not naturalised.
heaps of hair rings and cypher'd seals;
rich trifles, serious bagatelles. prior.
ba'ggage. m. s. [from bag ; baggage, fr.]
1. the furniture and utensils of an army.
the army was an hundred and seventy thousand footmen,
and twelve thousand horsemen, beside the baggage. judith.
riches are the baggage of virtue; they cannot be spared,
nor left behind, but they hinder the march. bacon.
they were probably always in readiness, and carried among
the baggage of the army. addison an italy.
2. the goods that are to be carried away, as bag and baggage.
dolabella designed, when his affairs grew desperate in egypt,
to pack up bag and baggage, and sail for italy. arbuthnot.
3. a worthless woman ; in french bagasie; so called, because
such women follow camps.
a spark of indignation did rise in her, not to suffer such a
baggage to win away any thing of hers. sidney.
when this baggage meets with a man who has vanity to
credit relations, she turns him to account. społator.
ba'gn so. m. s. [lagno, ital. a bath..] a house for bathing,
sweating, and otherwise cleansing the body.
i have known two instances of malignant fevers produced
by the hot air of a bagnio. arbuthnot on air.
ba(gpipe. m. s. [from bag and pipe ; the wind being received
in a bag..] a musical instrument, consisting of a leathern bag,
which blows up like a foot-ball, by means of a port vent or
little tube fixed to it, and stopped by a valve ; and three pipes
or flutes, the first called the great pipe or drone, and the second
the little one ; which pass the wind out only at the bottom ;
the third has a reed, and is played on by compressing the bag
under the arm, when full; and opening or stopping the holes,
which are eight, with the fingers. the bagpipe takes in the
compass of three oetaves. chambers.
no banners but shirts, with some bad bagpipes instead of
drum and fife. sidney.
vol. i.
tions ; it seems to come from the french bailer, to put into the
hand; to deliver up, as a man delivers himself up in surety.]
bail is the freeing or setting at liberty one arrested or impri-
soned upon action either civil or criminal, under security
taken for his appearance. there is both common and special
bail ; common bail is in actions of small prejudice, or slight
proof, called common, because any surcties in that case are
taken: whereas, upon causes of greater weight, or apparent
speciality, special bail or surety must be taken. there is a
difference between bail and mainprise ; for he that is main-
prised, is at large, until the day of his appearance: but
where a man is bailed, he is always accounted by the law to
be in their ward and custody for the time : and they may, if
they will, keep him in ward or in prison at that time, or
otherwise at their will. cowel.
worry'd with debts, and past all hopes of bail,
th’ unpity'd wretch lies rotting in a jail. rosommon.
and bribe with presents, or when presents fail,
they send their prostituted wives for bail. dryden.
to bai l. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to give bail for another.
let me be their bail—
they shall be ready at your highness' will,
to answer their suspicion
thou shalt not bail them.
2. to admit to bail.
when they had bailed the twelve bishops, who were in the
tower, the house of commons, in great indignation, caused
them immediately to be recommitted to the tower. carendon.
batlable. adj. [from bail.] that may be set at liberty by bail
or sureties.
ba ili f. n.s.. [a word of doubtful etymology in itself, but bor-
rowed by us from baillie, fr.]
1. a subordinate officer.
lausanne is under the canton of berne, governed by a bailiff
sent every three years from the senate of berne. addison.
2. an officer whose business it is to execute arrests.
it many times happeneth, that, by the under-sheriffs and
their bailiffs, the owner hath incurred the forfeiture, before he
cometh to the knowledge of the process that runneth against
shakesp. titus andronicus.
him. bacon.
a bailiff, by mistake, seized you for a debtor, and kept you
the whole evening in a spunging-house. swift.
swift as a bard the hailiff leaves behind. pope.
3. an under steward of a manor.
ba'iliwick. m. s. [of baillie, fr. and pic, sax.] the place of
the jurisdiction of a bailiff within his hundred, or the lord's
franchise. it is that liberty which is exempted from the she-
riff of the county, over which the lord of the liberty appointeth
a bailiff. cowel.
a proper officer is to walk up and down his bailiwicks. spen.
there issued writs to the sheriffs, to return the names of the
several land owners in their several bailiwicks. hale.
to bait. v. a. [batan, sax. baitzen, germ.]
1. to put meat upon a hook, in some place, to tempt fish or
other animals.
oh, cunning enemy, that to catch a saint
with saints dost bait thy hook! most dangerous
is that temptation that doth goad us on
to fin in loving virtue. shakesp. measure for measure.
let's be revenged on him; let's appoint him a meeting,
give him a show of comfort in his suit, and lead him on with
a sure laited delay, till he hath pawned his horses to mine
host of the garter. shaksp. merry i/ives of j/indsor.
many sorts of fishes feed upon insects, as is well known to
anglers, who bait their hooks with them. ray.
how are the sex improv’d in an’rous arts |
what new-found snares they bait for human hearts gay.
2. to give meat to one's self, or horses, on the road.
what so strong,
rot wanting rest, will also want of might :
the sun, that measures heaven all day long,
at night doth bait his fleeds the ocean waves among. spens.
to bait. v. a. [from battre, fr. to beat. j
1. to attack with violence.
who seeming forely chaffed at his band,
as chained bear, whom cruel dogs do bait,
with idle force did fain then to withstand. fairy queen.
q o - i will
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 210</div><p class="text">b a k
b a l
- i will not yield
to kiss the ground before young malcolm's fect; -
and to be baited with the rabble's curse. shak. macbeth.
3. to harass by the help of others; as, we bait a boar with
mastiffs, but a bull with bull-dogs.
‘s, bait. v. n. to stop at any place for refreshment; perhaps
this word is more properly bate; to abate speed.
but our desires tyrannical extortion,
doth force us there to set our chief delightfulness,
where but a baiting place is all our portion.
as one who on his journey baits at noon,
tho' bent on speed: so here th' archangel paus'd. milton.
in all our journey from london to his house, we did not
so much as bait at a whig inn. addison. spectator.
to ba1 r. v. n. [as an hawk.] to clap the wings; to make an
offer of flying; to flutter.
all plum'd like estridges, that with the wind
baited like eagles having lately bath'd;
glittering in golden coats like images. shakespeare.
hood my unman’d blood baiting in my cheeks
with thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold,
thinks true love asted simple modesty. shakspeare.
another way i have to man my haggard,
to make her come, and know her keeper's call ;
that is, to watch her as we watch these kites,
that bait and beat, and will not be obedient. shakespeare.
bait, n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. meat set to allure fish, or other animals, to a snare.
the pleasant'st angling is to see the fish
cut with her golden oars the silver stream,
sidney,
and greedily devour the treacherous bait. shakespeare.
2. a temptation ; an enticement ; allurement.
and that same glorious beauty's idle boast,
is but a bait such wretches to beguile. spensor.
taketh there with the souls of men, as with the baits.
hooker.
sweet words i grant, baits and allurements sweet,
but greatest hopes with greatest crosses meet. fairfax.
fruit, like that
which grew in paradise, the bait of eve
usid by the tempter. milton.
secure from foolish pride's affe&amp;ted state,
and specious flattery's more pernicious bait. ryscommon.
her head was bare,
but for her native ornament of hair,
which in a simple knot was ty'd above:
sweet negligence' unheeded bait of love | drydon.
grant that others could with equal glory,
look down on pleasures, and the baits of sense. addison.
3. a refreshment on a journey.
ba1ze. n.s. a kind of coarse open cloth stuff, having a long
nap ; sometimes frized on one side, and sometimes not frized.
this stuff is without wale, being wrought on a loom with
two treddles, like flannel. chambers.
to bake. v. a. participle passive, baked or baken. [baecan, sax.
becken, germ. supposed by //achter to come from bec, which,
in the phrygian language, signified bread.]
1. to heat any thing in a close place ; generally in an oven.
he will take thereof, and warm himself; yea he kindleth it,
and baketh bread. isaiah.
the difference of prices of bread proceeded from their de-
licacy in bread, and perhaps something in their manner of
baking. - arbuthnot.
2. to harden in the fire.
the work of the fire is a kind of baking ; and whatsoever
the fire baketh, time doth in some degree dissolve. bacon.
3. to harden with heat.
o with vehement suns
when dusty summer bakes the crumbling clods,
how pleasant is’t, beneath the twisted arch,
to ply the sweet carouse !
the sun with flaming arrows pierc'd the flood,
and, darting to the bottom, bak'd the mud.
to bake. v. n.
1. to do the work of baking.
i keep his house, and i wash, wring, brew, bake, scour,
dress meat, and make the beds, and do all myself. shaksp.
2. to be heated or baked.
fillet of a fenny snake,
in the cauldron boil and bake.
baked meats. meats dressed by the oven.
there be some houses, wherein sweetmeats will relent,
and baked weats will mould, more than others. bacon.
bakehouse. m. s. [from bake and house..] a place for baking
bread. -
i have marked a willingness in the italian artizans, to distri-
bute the kitchen, pantry, and bakehouse under ground.
- j/otton.
philips.
shakesp. macbeth.
baken. the participle from to bake.
there was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at
his head. i kings.
ba'ker. m. s. [from to bake.] he whose trade is to bake.
dryden.
in life and health, every man must proceed upon trust, there
being no knowing the intention of the cook or baker. south.
ba'lan ce. n.s.. [balance, fr. bi'anx, lat.]
1. one of the six simple powers in mechanicks, used principally
for determining the difference of weight in heavy bodies. it is
of several forms. chambers.
2. a pair of scales.
a balance of power, either without or within a state, is best
conceived by considering what the nature of a balance is. it
supposes three things; first, the part which is held, together
with the hand that holds it; and then the two scales, with
whatever is weighed therein. swift.
for when on ground the burden balance lies,
the empty part is lifted up the higher. sir j. davies:
3. a metaphorical balance, or the mind employed in comparing
one thing with another.
i have in equal balance justly weighed,
what wrong our arms may do, what wrongs we suffer:
griefs heavier than our offences. shaksp. henry iv.
4. the act of comparing two things, as by the balance.
comfort arises not from others being miserable, but from
this inference upon the balance, that we suffer only the lot of
nature. l'estrange.
upon a fair balance of the advantages on either side, it will
appear, that the rules of the gospel are more powerful means of
conviction than such message. atterbury.
5. the overplus of weight; that quantity by which, of two
things weighed together, one exceeds the other.
care being taken, that the exportation exceed in value the
importation ; and then the balance of trade must of necessi
be returned in coin or bullion. bacon's advice to polliers.
6. that which is wanting to make two parts of an account
even ; as, he flated the account with his correspondent, and
paid the balance.
7. equipoise; as, balance of power. see the second sense.
love, hope, and joy, fair pleasure's smiling train,
hate, fear, and grief, the family of pain;
these mix’d with art, and to due bounds confin'd,
make and maintain the balance of the mind.
8. the beating part of a watch.
it is but supposing that all watches, whilst the balance beats,
think; and it is sufficiently proved, that my watch thought all
last night. locke.
9. [in astronomy.] one of the twelve signs of the zodiack, com-
monly called libra.
or wilt thou warm our summers with thy rays,
and seated near the balance poise the days.
to ba'lan ce. v. a. [balancer, fr.]
1. to weigh in a balance, either real or figurative; to compare
by the balance.
if men would but balance the good and the evil of things,
they would not venture soul and body for dirty interest. l’esir.
2. to regulate the weight in a balance ; to keep in a state of
just proportion.
heav'n that hath plac'd this island to give law,
to balance europe, and her states to awe. waller.
3. to counterpoise ; to weigh equal to; to be equipollent; to
counteract.
the attraction of the glass is balanced, and rendered ineffec-
tual by the contrary attraction of the liquor. newton.
4. to regulate an account, by stating it on both sides.
judging is balancing an account, and determining on which
side the odds lie. locke.
5. to pay that which is wanting to make the two parts of an
account equal. -
pope.
dryden.
give him leave
to balance the account of blenheim's day. prior.
though i am very well satisfied, that it is not in my power
to balance accounts with my maker, i am resolved, however,
to turn all my endeavours that way. addison. spediator.
to bat an.cf. v. n. to hesitate; to fluctuate between equal
motives, as a balance plays when charged with equal weights.
were the satisfaction of luft, and the joys of heaven, offered
to any one's present poslession, he would not balance, or err in
the determination of his choice. locke-
since there is nothing that can offend, i see not why you
should balance a moment about printing it. atterbury to pope.
balancer. m. s. [from balance.] the person that weighs any
thing.
ba'l ass ruby. m. s. [lalas, fr. supposed to be an indian term.]
a kind of ruby.
balas; ruby is of a crimson colour, with a cast of purple,
and seems best to answer the description of the ancients.
j/oodward on fossils.
to balbu'cinate. v. n. [from balbutio, lat..] to stammer in
speaking. die?.
to balbu'tiate. v. n. the same with ballucinate. dic7.
balco'ny. m. s. [balcon, fr. balcone, ital.] a frame of iron,
wood, or stone, before the window of a room.
then pleasure came, who, liking not the fashion,
began to make balconies, terraces,
till she had weaken'd all by alteration. ferbert.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
6 when
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 211</div><p class="text">b a l
when dirty waters from balconies drop,
and dext'rous damsels twirl the sprinkling mop. gay.
bald. adj. [bal, welch.]
1. wanting hair; despoiled of hair by time or sickness.
neither shall men make themselves bald for them. ‘feremiah.
i find it remarked by marchetti, that the cause of baldness
in men is the dryness of the brain, and its shrinking from the
fkull; he having observed, that in bald persons, under the bald
part, there was a vacuity between the skull and the brain. ray.
he should imitate caesar, who, because his head was bald,
covered that defect with laurels. addison.
2. without natural covering.
under an oak, whose boughs were moss'd with age,
and high top bald with dry antiquity. shakespeare.
3. without the usual covering. -
he is set at the upper end o' th' table; but they fland bald
before him. shakspeare.
4. unadorned; inelegant.
hobbes, in the preface to his own bald translation, begins
the praise of homer when he should have ended it.
dryden's fables, preface.
and that, though labour'd, line must bald appear,
that brings ungrateful musick to the ear. creech.
5. mean ; naked; without dignity; without value; bare.
what should the people do with these bald tribunes
on whom depending, their obedience fails
to th’ greater bench. shakespeare.
6. bald was used by the northern nations, to fignify the same as
audax, bold; and is still in use. so baldwin, and by inversion
jpinbald, is bold conqueror; ethelbald, nobly bold; eadball, hap-
pily bold; which are of the same import as thraseas, thrasyma-
, thus, and thrasybulus, &amp;c. gibson.
bald achin. m. s. shaldachino, ital.] a piece of architecture,
in form of a canopy, supported with columns, and serving as a
covering to an altar. it properly signifies a rich silk, du cance,
and was a canopy carried over the host. builder's dio.
ba'id erdas h. n.s. [probably of balo, sax. bold, and dash, to
mingle.] any thing jumbled together without judgment;
rude mixture ; a confused discourse.
to ba(lp erdas h. v. a. [from the noun..] to mix or adulte-
rate any liquor.
baldly adv. [from bald.] nakedly; meanly; inelegantly.
bal dr. ony. n.s. the same with gentian.
ba‘ld n ess. n.f. [from bald.]
1. i he want of hair.
2. the loss of hair. -
- which happen'd on the skin to light,
and there corrupting to a wound,
spreads leprosy and baldness round. swift.
3. meanness of writing; inelegance.
ba'ldr1ck. m. s. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. a girdle. by some dictionaries it is explained a bracelet; but
i have not found it in that sense.
athwart his breast a baldrick brave he ware,
that shin'd like twinkling stars, with stones most precious
rare. fairy queen.
a radiant baldrick o'er his shoulders ty'd,
sustain'd the sword that glitter'd at his side. pope.
2. the zodiack.
that like the twins of jove, they seem'd in fight,
which deck the baldrick of the heavens bright. spenser.
bale. n.s.. [balle, fr.] a bundle or parcel of goods packed up
for carriage.
one hired an ass in the dog-days, to carry certain bales of
goods to such a town. l’estrange.
it is part of the bales in which bohea tea was brought over
from china. //oodward.
bale. m. s. [bael, sax. bale, dan. bal, bol, icelandish..] misery;
calamity. -
she look’d about, and seeing one in mail,
arm'd to point, sought back to turn again;
for light she hated as the deadly base. fairy queen.
to bal.e. v. a. a word used by the sailors, who bid bale out the
water; that is, lave it out, by way of distinction from pump-
ing. skinner. i believe from bailer, fr. to deliver from
hand to hand.
to bai.e. v. n. [emballer, fr. imballure, ital.] to make up
into a bale.
ba‘leful... adj. [from bale.]
1. full of misery; full of grief; sorrowful; sad ; woful.
ah! luckless babe, born under cruel star,
and in dead parents baleful ashes bred.
but when i feel the bitter baleful smart,
which her fair eyes unwares do work in me,
i think that i a new pando, a see. spenser.
round he throws his baseful eyes,
that witness'd huge affliction and dismay,
mix’d with obdurate pride and stedfast hate. milton.
2. full of michief ; destructive.
but when he saw his threat'ning was but vain,
he turn’d about, and search'd his baleful books again.
fairy queen.
fairy queen.
- a : boiling choler chokes;
by fight of these, our baleful enemies.
unseen, unfelt, the fiery serpent skims,
betwixt her linen and her naked limbs; -
his halful breath inspiring, as he glides. dryden.
happy ierne, whose most wholesome air
oisons envenom'd spiders, and forbids
the balful toad, and vipers from her shore. philipi.
b^lefully adv. (from baoul. sorrowfully; mischievously.
balk; n.s. [halk, dut. and germ.] a great beam such as is
used in building ; a rafter over an outhouse or barn.
balk. m. s. [derived by stinner from valicare, ital, to pass over.]
a ridge of land of unploughed between the furrows, or a:
the end of the field.
72 balk. v. a. [see the noun.]
1. to disappoint; to frustrate; to elude.
another thing in the grammar schools i see no use of, unless
it be to balk young lads in learning languages. locke.
every one has a desire to keep up the vigour of his faculties,
and not to talk his understanding by what is too hard for it.
shaisar.
looe.
but one may balk this good intent,
and take things otherwise than meant. prior.
the prices must have been high; for a people so rich would
not balk their fancy. arbuthnot.
balo'd of his prey, the yelling monster flies,
and fills the city with his hideous cries. pope.
is there a variance : enter but his door,
balod are the courts, and contest is no more. pope.
2. to miss anything; to leave untouched.
by grisly pluto he doth swear,
he rent his clothes, and tore his hair;
and as he runneth here and there,
... an acorn cup he greeteth;
which soon he taketh by the stalk,
about his head he lets it walk,
nor doth he any creature balk,
but lays on all he meeteth.
3. to omit, or refuse anything.
this was looked for at your hand, and this was baht. shaft.
4. to heap, as on a ridge. this, or something like this, seems
to be intended here.
ten thousand bold scots, three and twenty knights,
balk'd in their own blood, did sir walter see
. on holmedon's plains. shakespeare.
ba'i. kers. n. / [in fishery.) men who stand on a cliff, of high
place on the shore, and give a sign to the men in the fishino-
boats, which way the passage or shole of herrings is. cowel.
the pilchards are pursued by a bigger fish, called a plusher,
- who leapeth above water, and bewrayed them to the halor.
- carew's survey of cornwall.
drayt. nimphid.
ball. n.s.. [bol, dan. bol, dutch.]
bal, diminutively belin, the sun, or apollo of the celtae,
was called by the ancient gauls abellio. whatever was rou nd,
and in particular the head, was called by the ancients either
bal, or bes, and likewise bel and biil. among the modern
persians, the head is called pole; and the flemings still call
the head boise. ii6xo, is the head or poll, and ros., is to
turn. 36a's likewise signifies a round ball, whence bowl, and
bell, and ball, which the welch term bel. by the scotch also
the head is named bhal; whence the english bill is derived,
signifying the beak of a bird. figuratively, the phrygians and
thurians, by 3xxxny understood a king. hence also, in the
syriack dialects, 32&amp;a, 3%, and likewise box, signifies lord,
and by this name also the sun; and, in some dialects, "ha and
'i', whence"ixor, and halos, trixios, and boxes, and also in
the celtick diminutive way of expression, "easwo;, texswox, and
bowo, signified the sun; and 'exion, tixion, and boxton, the
moon. among the teutonicks, hol and heil have the same
meaning; whence the adjective holig, or heisig, is derived,
and signifies divine or holy; and the aspiration being changed
into s, the romans form their sol. s baxter.
1. anything made in a round form, or approaching to round.
worms with many feet, round themselves into talls under
logs of timber, but not in the timber. bacon.
nor arms they wear, nor swords and bucklers wield,
but whirl from leathern strings huge balls of lead. orydon.
like a ball of snow tumbling down a hill, he gathered
strength as he passed. howel.
still unripen'd in the dewy mines,
within the ball a trembling water shines,
that through the crystal darts. addison.
such of those corpuscles as happened to combine into one
mass, formed the metallick and mineral balls, or nodules,
which we find. - - jfoodward.
2. a round thing to play with, either with the hand or foot, or
a racket.
balls to the stars, and thralls to fortune's reign,
turn'd from themselves, infected with their cage,
where death is fear'd, and life is held with pain. sidney.
those i have seen play at ball, grow extremely earnest who
should have the ball. sidney.
3. a
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 212</div><p class="text">3. a small round thing, with some particular mark, by which
votes are given, or lots cast.
let lots decide it.
for ev’ry number'd captive put a ball
into an urn ; three only black be there,
the rest, all white, are safe.
minos, the strict inquisitor, appears;
round in his urn the blended ball; he rowls;
absolves the just, and dooms the guilty souls.
4. a globe ; as, the ball of the earth.
julius and antony, those lords of all,
low at her feet present the conquer'd ball.
ye gods, what justice rules the ball p
freedom and arts together fall.
5. a globe borne as an ensign of sovereignty. -
hear the tragedy of a young man, that by right ought to
hold the ball of a kingdom; but, by fortune, is made himself
a ball, tossed from misery to misery, from place to place.
-- bacon.
6. any part of the body that approaches to roundness; as the
lower and swelling part of the thumb, the apple of the eye.
be subject to no sight but mine; invisible
to every eye ball else. shakespeare.
to make a stern countenance, let your brow bend so, that
it may almost touch the ball of the eye. peasham.
7. the parchment spread over a hollow piece of wood, stuffed
with hair or wool, which the printers dip in ink, to spread it
on the letters.
ball. m. s. [bal, fr. from ballare, low lat. from 32xxssiv, to
dance.] an entertainment of dancing, at which the prepara-
tions are made at the expence of some particular person.
if golden sconces hang not on the walls,
to light the costly suppers and the balls. dryden.
he would make no extraordinary figure at a ball; but i can
assure the ladies, for their consolation, that he has writ better
verses on the sex than any man. swift.
ba'll ad. n. s. [balade, fr.] a song.
ballad once signified a solemn and sacred song, as well as
trivial, when solomon's song was called the ballad of ballad, ;
but now it is applied to nothing but trifling verse. j/atts.
an' i have not ballads made on you all, and sung to filthy
dryden.
dryden.
granville.
pope.
tunes, may a cup of sack be my poison. shakespeare.
like the sweet ballad, this amusing lay
too long detains the lover on his way. gay.
73 batlad. v. n. [from the noun..] to make or sing bal-
lads. -
saucy lictors
will catch at us like strumpets, and scall'd rhimers
ballad us out o' tune. shak speare.
ba'll ad-singer. m. s. [from ballad and sing.] one whose
employment is to sing ballads in the streets.
no sooner 'gan he raise his tuneful song,
but lads and lasies round about him throng.
not ballad-singer, plac'd above the crowd,
sings with a note so shrilling, sweet and loud.
ba'llast, n. s. [ballosle, dutch..]
1. something put at the bottom of the ship to keep it steady to
the center of gravity.
there must be middle counsellors to keep things steady;
for, without that hallas?, the ship will roul too much. bacon.
as for the ascent of a submarine vessel, this may be easily
contrived, if there be some great weight at the bottom of the
ship, being part of its ballost; which, by some cord within,
may be loosened from it. joilkins.
as when empty barks or billows float,
with sandy ballas! sailors trim the boat;
so bees bear gravel stones, whose poising weight
steers through the whistling winds their steddy flight. dryd.
2. that which is used to make any thing steady.
why should he fink where nothing secn'd to press
his lading little, and his ballas? less. swift.
to ba’ll ast. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to put weight at the bottom of a ship, in order to keep her
sleady.
foil be so ballasied, as to be of equal weight with the
like magnitude of water, it will be moveable. // ilkins.
2. to keep any thing steady.
whilst thus to ballast love, i thought,
and so more steddily to have gone,
i saw, i had love's pinnace overfraught.
now you have given me virtue for my guide,
and with true honour ballafied my pride. dryden.
ballette. n.s. [ballette, fr.] a dance in which some history
is represented.
ba'lliards. m. s. [from ball, and yard, or stick to push it with.]
a play at which a ball is driven by the end of a stick; now
corruptly called billiards.
with dice, with cards, with balliards, far unfit,
with shuttlecocks misseeming manly wit.
b.a. l 1. 1st er. see balustre.
ballc/n. n
no. } n. s. [ballon, fr.]
gay.
donne.
speosor.
1. a large round short-necked vessel used in chymistry. -
2. [in architecture.] a ball or globe placed on the top of a pillar.
3. [in fireworks.] a ball of pasteboard, stuffed with combustible
matter, which, when fired, mounts to a considerable height in
the air, and then bursts into bright sparks of fire, resen.bling
stars.
ballor. m. s. [ballote, fr.]
1. a little ball or ticket used in giving votes, being put privately
into a box or urn.
2. the aet of voting by ballot.
to ba'llot. v. n. [ballater, fr.] to choose by bailot, that is, by
putting little balls or tickets, with particular marks, privatel?
in a box; by counting which it is known what is the result of
the poll, without any discovery by whom each vote was
1ven.
g no competition arriving to a sufficient number of balls,
they fell to ballot some others. - footton,
giving their votes by balloting, they lie under no awe. swift.
ballota's ion. m. s. [from ballot.) the act of voting by ballot.
the election is intricate and curious, consisting of ten se-
veral ballotations. jp'otton.
balm. m. s. [baume, fr. balsamum, lat.]
i. the sap or juice of a shrub, remarkably odoriferous.
balm trickles through the bleeding veins
of happy shrubs, in idumean plains. dryden,
2. any valuable or fragrant ointment.
thy place is filled, thy sceptre wrung from thee;
thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wait anointed.
s&amp;akosheart.
3. anything that sooths or mitigates pain.
you were conducted to a gentle bath,
and balms apply'd to you. shakespeare.
your praise's argument, balm of your age;
dearest and best. shakespeare.
a tender smile, our sorrow's only balm. loung.
hono ! m. s. smelsa, lat..] the name of a plant.
the species are, 1. garden balm.
yellow variegated flowers.
softcr hairy leaves.
balm of gilead.
1. the juice drawn from the balsam tree, by making incisions
in its bark. its colour is first white, soon after green; but
when it comes to be old, it is of the colour of honey. the
smell of it is agreeable, and very penetrating ; the taste of it
bitter, sharp and astringent. as little issues from the plant
by incision, the balm sold by the merchants, is made of the
wood and green branches of the tree, distilled by fire, which
is generally adulterated with turpentine. cornet.
it seems to me, that the zori of gilead, which we render
in our bible by the word balm, was not the same with the
balsam of mecca, but only a better fort of turpentine, thea
in use for the cure of wounds and other diseases.
prideaux's conne&amp;ions.
2. a plant remarkable for the strong balsamick scent, which its
leaves emit, upon being bruised; whence some have supposed,
crroneously, that the balm of gilead was taken from this plant.
4:iller.
2. garden ba'in, with
3. stinking roman balm, with
ilsillor.
7% balm. v. a. [from lahn.]
1. to anoint with balm; or with any thing medicinal.
balm his foul head with warm distilled waters,
and burn sweet wood: shakespeare.
2. to sooth ; to mitigate; to assuage.
oppicft nature sleeps:
this rest might yet have balm'd thy senses.
ba'lmy. adj. [from balm j
1. having the qualities of balm.
soft on the flow'ry herb i found me laid,
in balmy sweat; which with his beams the sun
soon dry'd.
2. producing balm.
let india boast her groves, nor envy we
the weeping amber, and the balmy tree.
3. soothing; soft; mild.
come, desdemona, ’tis the soldiers’ life
to have their baoy slumbers wak'd with strife.
such visions hourly pass before my fight,
which from my eyes their balny slumbers fright.
4. fragrant; odoriferous.
those rich perfumes which, from the happy shore,
the winds upon their basiny wings convey'd,
shoshcare.
milton.
p“fe.
shakes.
dryden.
whose guilty sweetness first the world betray'd. doyon.
first eurtis to the rising morn is sent,
the regions of the bany continent. dryden.
5. mitigating ; assuasive.
oh balmy breath, that doth almost persuade
justice to break her sword shafts care.
bat.n.e.a.r.y. m. s. [baneanion, lat.] a bathing-room.
the bahiraries, and bathing-places, he exposeth unto the
summer setting. brown's /ulgar e. rours.
balneation. m. s. [from basicum, lat, a bath..] the act of
bathing.
8 - as
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 213</div><p class="text">b. a. n.
b a n
:
t
t
h
-
w;
as the head may be disturbed by the skin, it may the same
way be relieved, as is observable in balneations, and fomenta-
tions of that part. brown's pulgar errours.
ba'lneatory. adj. [balnearius, lat.] belonging to a bath or
stove.
ba‘lorade. n.s. the leap of an horse, so that when his
fore-feet are in the air, he shews nothing but the shoes of his
hinder-feet, without yerking out. a balotade differs from a
capriole; for when a horse works at caprioles, he yerks out
his hinder legs with all his force. farrier's dief.
ba'lsam. n.s.[balsamum, lat.] ointment; unguent; an unc-
tuous application thicker than oil, and softer than salve.
christ's blood our balsam ; if that cure us here, -
him, when our judge, we shall not find severe. denham.
ba is am apple. [monoraica, lat.] an annual indian plant.
ba'lsam tree.
this is a shrub which scarce grows taller than the pome-
granate tree; the blossoms are like small stars, very fragrant :
whence spring our little pointed pods, inclosing a fruit like
an almond, called carpobalsamum, as the wood is called xylo-
balsamum, and the juice opobalsamum. calmet.
balsa‘mical. r. adj. [from baljam..] having the qualities of
balsa‘m ick. ; balsam ; unctuous; mitigating; fost; mild ;
oily. ;
# there be a wound in my leg, the vital energy of my soul
thrusts out the balsamical humour of my blood to heal it. hale.
, the aliment of such as have fresh wounds ought to be such
as keeps the humours from putrefaction, and renders them oily
and balsamick. arbuthnot.
ba‘luster. m. s. [according to du cange, from balausorium, low
lat. a bathing place.] a small column or pilaster from an
inch and three quarters to four inches square or diameter.
their dimensions and forms are various ; they are frequently
adorned with mouldings; they are placed with rails on stairs,
and in the fronts of galleries in churches.
this should first have been planched over, and railed about
with balusters. carew.
ba’lus+ rade. m.s.. [from balusler.] an assemblage of one or
more rows of little turned pillars, called balusters, fixed upon
a terras, or the top of a building, for separating one part from
another. -
bam, beam, being initials in the name of any place, usually
imply it to have been woody; from the saxon beam, which
we use in the same sense to this day. gibson.
ba’mboo. n.s. an indian plant of the reed kind. it has fe-
veral shoots, much larger than our ordinary reeds, which are
knotty, and separated from space to space by joints. the
bamboo is much larger than the sugar-cane, --
to bambo'oz le. v. a. [a cant word not used in pure or in
grave writings.] to deceive ; to impose upon; to con-
found.
after nick had bamboozled about the money; john called
for counters. arbuthnot.
bam boozler. m. s. [from bamboozle.] a tricking fellow ; a
cheat.
there are a set of fellows they tall banterers and bambooz-
lers, that play such tricks. arbuthnot.
ban. n.s.. [ban, teut. a publick proclamation, as of proscrip-
tion, interdiction, excommunication, publick sale.]
1. publick notice given of any thing, whereby anything is pub-
lickly commanded or forbidden. this word we use especially
in the publishing matrimonial contracts in the church, before
marriage, to the end that if any man can say against the in-
tention of the parties, either in respect of kindred or other-
wise, they may take their exception in time. and, in the
canon law, banna sunt proclamationes spons &amp; sponse in ecclesis
fieri soliti. cowel.
i bar it in the interest of my wife;
*tis she is subcontracted to this lord,
and i her husband contradict your bans.
to draw her neck into the bans.
2. a curse; excommunication.
thou mixture rank of midnight weeds colle&amp;ted,
with hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected. hamlet.
a great oversight it was of st. peter that he did not accurse
nero, whereby the pope might have got all; yet what need
of such a ban, since friar vincent could tell atabalipa, that
shakespeare.
hudibras.
kingdoms were the pope's. raleigh.
3. interdiction.
bold deed to eye
the sacred fruit, sacred to abstinence,
much more to taste it, under ban to touch. milton.
4. ban of the empire; a publick censure by which the privileges
of any german prince are suspended.
he proceeded so far by treaty, that he was proffered to have
the imperial ban taken off altapinus, upon submission. howel.
to ban. v. a. [bannen, dut. to curse.] to curse; to execrate.
shall we think that it baneth the work which they leave
behind them, or taketh away the use thereof * hooker.
it is uncertain whether this word, in the foregoing sense, is
to w. o from ban, to curse, or bane, to poison.
.v ol, l.
*
in thy closet pent up, rue my shame -
and ban our enemies, both mine and thine. shakoshear.
before these moors went a numidian priest, bellowing out
charms, and casting scrowls of paper on each side, wherein
he cursed and banned the christians. knolles.
banana tree. a species of plantain.
band. m. s. [bende, dutch; band, saxon.]
i. o a bandage; that by which one thing is joined to an-
other.
you shall find the band, that seems to tie their friendship
together, will be the very strangler of their amity. shakesp.
2. a chain by which any animal is kept in restraint. this is
now usually spelt, less properly, bend.
so wild a beast, so tame ytaught to be,
and buxom to his bands, is joy to see. hulberd's tale.
since you deny him ent’rance, he demands
his wife, whom cruelly you hold in bands. dryden.
3. any means of union or connexion between persons.
here's eight that must take hands,
to join in hymen's band. shakespeare.
4. something worn about the neck; a neckcloth. it is now
restrained to a neckcloth of particular form worn by clergy-
men, lawyers, and students in colleges.
for his mind i do not care,
that's a toy that i could spare:
let his title be but great,
his cloaths rich, and band fit meat. ben. johnson.
he took his lodging at the mansion-house of a taylor's
widow, who washes and can clear-starch his band. addison.
5. anything bound round anothcr.
in old statues of stone in cellars, the feet of them being
bound with leaden bands, it appeared that the lead did swell.
bacon.
6. in archite&amp;ure. any flat low member or moulding, called
also fascia, face, or plinth.
7. a company of soldiers.
and, good my lord of somerset, unite -
your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot. shakes).
8. a company of persons joined together in any common design.
we few, we happy few, we band of brothers. shałop.
the queen in white array before her band,
saluting took her rival by the hand. dryden.
on a sudden, methought this select band sprang forward,
with a resolution to climb the ascent, and follow the call of
that heavenly musick. - tatler.
strait the three band; prepare in arms to join,
each band the number of the sacred nine.
to band. v. a. [from band.]
1. to unite .." into one body or troop.
the bishop, and the duke of glo'ster's men,
have fill'd their pockets full of pebble stones,
and banding themselves in contrary parts,
do pelt at one another's pates. shakespeare.
* some of the boys banded themselves as for the major, and
others for the king, who, after fix days skirmishing, at last
pope.
made a composition, and departed. carew.
they to live exempt
from heav'n's high jurisdiction, in new league
banded against his throne. milton.
2. to bind over with a band.
and by his mother stood an infant lover,
with wings unfledg'd, his eyes were banded over. dryden.
bands of a saddle, are two pieces of iron nailed upon the bows
of the saddle, to hold the bows in the right situation.
ba'ndage. m. s. [bandage, fr.]
1. something bound over another. *
zeal too had a place among the rest, with a bandage over
her eyes; though one would not have expected to have seen
her represented in snow. addison.
cords were fastened by hooks to my bandages, which the
workmen had girt round my neck. gulliver.
2. it is used, in surgery, for the fillet or roller wrapped over a
wounded member; and, sometimes, for the act or practice
of applying bandages. -
bandbox. n.s.. [from band and box.] a slight box used for
bands and other things of small weight.
my friends are surprised to find two bandboxes among my
books, till i let them see that they are lined with deep eru-
dition. addison.
with empty bandbox she delights to range,
and feigns a distant errand from the 'change. gay's trivia.
ba'ndelet. n.s.. [bandelet, fr. in architecture.] any little
band, flat moulding, or fillet.
ba(ndit. n.s.. [bandito, ital.] a man outlawed.
no savage fierce, bandit, or mountaineer,
will dare to soil her virgin purity. milton,
no bandit fierce, no tyrant mad with pride,
no cavern'd hermit, rests self satisfy'd. pope.
bandi’tto. m. s. in the plural banditti... [bandita, ital.]
a roman sworder, and banditto slave,
murder'd sweet tully. shakeshcare.
p p bandog.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 214</div><p class="text">b a n
b a n
ba'ndog. m. s. [from ban or hand, and dog. the original of
this word is very doubtful. caius, de canibus britannicis, de-
rives it from band, that is, a dog chained up. skinner inclines
to deduce it from bana, a murderer. may it not come from
ban a curse, as we say a cur/? cur; or rather from baund,
swelled or large, a danish word ; from whence, in some
counties they call a great nut a ban-nut.j a kind of large
dog.
the time of night when troy was set on fire,
the time when screech-owls cry, and bandogs howl.
shakespeare's henry vi.
or privy, or pert, if any bin,
we have great bandogs will tear their skin. spenser.
ba'ndol eers. m. s. [bandouliers, fr.] small wooden cases
covered with leather, each of them containing powder that
is a sufficient charge for a musket.
ba'ndro1, m. s. [banderol, fr.] a little flag or streamer; the
little fringed silk flag that hangs on a trumpet.
ba'ndy. m. s. [from bander, fr.] a club turned round at bot-
tom for striking a ball at play.
to ba’ndy. v. a. [probably from bandy, the instrument with
which they strike balls at play, which being crooked, is
named from the term lander ; as, bander un arc, to string or
bend a bow.]
i. to beat to and fro, or from one to another.
they do cunningly, from one hand to another, bandy the
service like a tennis ball. spenser.
and like a ball bandy'd 'twixt pride and wit,
rather than yield, both sides the prize will quit.
- denham.
what, from the tropicks, can the earth repel ?
what vigorous arm, what repercussive blow,
bandies the mighty globe still to and fro blackmore.
2. to exchange; to give and take reciprocally.
do you bandy looks with me, you rascal ? shakespeare.
'tis not in thee
to grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
to bandy hasty words. shakspeare.
3. to agitate ; to toss about.
this hath been so bandled amongst us, that one can hardly
miss books of this kind. locke.
ever since men have been united into governments, the
endeavours after universal monarchy have been bandied among
them. swft.
let not obvious and known truth, or some of the most
plain and certain propositions, be bandied about in a dispu-
tation. j/atts.
to bandy. v. n. to contend, as at some game, in which
cach strives to drive the ball his own way.
no simple man that sees
this factious landying of their favourites,
but that he doth presage some ill event.
a valiant son-in-law thou shalt enjoy :
one fit to bandy with thy lawless sons,
to ruffle in the commonwealth.
could set up grandee against grandee,
to squander time away, and bandy ;
made lords and commoners lay sieges
to one another's privileges. hudibras.
after all the bandying attempts of resolution, it is as much
a question as ever. - glanville.
bandyleg. m. s. [from bander, fr.] a crooked leg.
he tells aloud your greatest failing, *
nor makes a scruple to expose
your bandylog, or crooked nose. swift.
ba'ndylegged, adj. [from bandylog.] having crooked legs.
the ethiopians had an one-eyed bandylogged prince; such a
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
person would have made but an odd figure. collier.
bane. m. s. [bana, sax, a murderer.]
1. poison.
begone, or else let me. 'tisbane to draw
the same air with thee. ben. johnson.
all good to me becomes
bane; and in heav'n much worse would be my state.
milton.
they with speed,
their course through thickest constellations held,
spreading their lane.
thus, am i doubly arm'd ; my death and life,
my bane and antidote, are both before me:
this, in a moment, brings me to an end;
but that informs me i shall never die.
2. that which destroys; mischief; ruin.
insolency must be represt, or it will be the bane of the
milton.
addison.
christian religion. hooker.
i will not be afraid of death and bane,
till birnam forest come to dunfinane. shakespeare.
suffices that to me strength is my bane,
and proves the source of all my miseries. milton.
so entertain'd those odorous sweets the fiend,
who came their bane, milton,
who can omit the gracchi, who declare
the scipios’ worth, those thunderbolts of war,
the double bane of carthage 2 drydon.
false religion is, in its nature, the greatest bane and destruc-
tion to government in the world. south.
to ba ne. v. a. [from the noun..] to poison.
what if my house be troubled wirh a rat,
and i be pleas'd to give ten thousand ducats
to have it ban'd.
ba'n eful. adj. [from bane and full.]
1. poisonous.
for voyaging to learn the direful art,
to taint with deadly drugs the barbed dart ;
observant of the gods, and sternly just,
ilus refus’d to impart the baneful trust.
2. destructive.
the silver eagle too is sent before,
which i do hope will prove to them as baneful,
as thou conceiv'st it to the commonwealth. ben. johnson.
the nightly wolf is bangful to the fold,
storms to the wheat, to buds the bitter cold. dryden.
ba'nefulness. n.s. [from laneful..] poisonousness; destruc-
tiveness.
ba'ne wort. m. s. [from lane and wort.] a plant, the same
with deadly mightshade.
to bang. v. a. [vengolen, dutch. }
1. to beat; to thump ; to cudgel: a low and familiar word.
one receiving from them some affronts, met with them
handsomely, and banged them to good purpose. howes.
he having got some iron out of the earth, put it into his
servants hands to fence with, and bang one another. locke-
formerly i was to be banged, because i was too strong, and
now, because i am too weak to resist; i am to be brought down.
when too rich, and oppressed, when too poor. arbuthnot.
2. to handle roughly 5 to treat with violence, in general.
the desperate tempest hath so bang'd the turks,
that their designment halts. shakespeare.
you should accost her with jests fire-new from the mint;
you should have banged the youth into dumbness. shakesp.
bang. m. s. [from the verb...] a blow ; a thump; a stroke :
a low word.
i am a bachelor.—that's to say, they are fools that marry;
shakespeare.
pope.
you'll bear me a tang for that. shakespeare.
with many a stiff twack, many a bang,
hard crabtree and old iron rang. hadilras.
i heard several bangs or buffets, as i thought, given to the
eagle that held the ring of my box in his beak. gulliver.
to bangle. v. a. to waste by little and little; to squander
carelessly: a word now used only in conversation.
if we bangle away the legacy of peace left us by christ,
it is a sign of our want of regard for him. duty of man-
to batnish. v. a. [banir, fr. banio, low lat. probably from
ban, teut. an outlawry, or proscription.]
1. to condemn to leave his own country.
oh, fare thee well !
those evils thou repeat'st upon thyself,
have banish'd me from scotland. shakespeare.
2. to drive away.
banish business, banish sorrow,
to the gods belongs to-morrow. cowley-
it is for wicked men only to dread god, and to endeavour
to banish the thoughts of him out of their minds. tillotson-
successless all her soft caresses prove,
to banish from his breast his country's love. pope.
ba'nishex. m. s. [from banish..] he that forces another from
his own country.
in mere spite,
to be full quit of those my banishers,
stand i before thee here.
ba'nish ment. n.s.. [banisement, fr.] -
1. the act of banishing another; as, he secured himself b
the banishment of his enemies. , or
2. the state of being banished ; exile.
- now go we in content
to liberty, and not to banishment.
round the wide world in banishment we roam,
forc'd from our pleasing fields and native home. dryden.
bank. n.s.. [banc, saxon.]
1. the earth arising on each side of a water. we say, pro-
perly, the shore of the sea, and the banks of a river, brook,
or small water.
have you not made an universal shout,
that tyber trembled underneath his bank p
richmond, in devonshire, sent out a boat
unto the shore, to ask those on the banks,
if they were his assistants. w
a brook whose stream so great, so good, *
was lov'd, was honour’d as a flood:
whose banks the muses dwelt upon.
'tis happy when our streams of knowlege flow,
to fill their banks, but not to cverthrow.
shakespears.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
crosław.
jdenham.
q early
</p></div><p>
            end of section 1.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881114#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section2" id="section2"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section 2</h3><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 215</div><p class="text">o carly lost what tears the river shed,
when the sad pomp along his banks was led !
2. any heap of earth piled up.
they besieged him in abel of bethmaachah, and they cast
up a bank against the city; and it stood in the trench. samuel.
3- [from banc, fr. a bench..] a seat or bench of rowers.
plac'd on their banks, the lusty trojans sweep
neptune's smooth face, and cleave the yielding deep.
//aller.
pope.
mean time the king with gifts a vessel stores,
supplies the banks with twenty chosen oars. dryden.
that banks of oars were not in the same plain, but raised
above one another, is evident from descriptions of ancient
ihips. arbuthnot.
4. a place where money is laid up to be called for occasionally.
let it be no bank, or common stock, but every man be
- master of his own money. not that i altogether mislike
banks, but they will hardly be brooked. bacon's essays.
this mass of treasure you should now reduce ;
but you your store have hoarded in some bank. denham.
there pardons and indulgences, and giving men a share iri
saints merits, out of the common bank and treasury of the
church, which the pope has the sole custody of. south.
. the company of persons concerned in managing a bank.
to bank. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to inclose with banks.
amid the cliffs
and burning sands, that bank the shrubby vales.
2. to lay up money in a bank.
ba'nk-bill... n.f. [from bank and bill.] a note for money laid
up in a bank, at the sight of which the money is paid.
let three hundred pounds be paid her out of my ready
money, or bank-bills. wift.
bank er. m. s. [from bank.] one that trafficks in money; one
that keeps or manages a bank.
whole droves of lenders croud the banker's doors,
thomson.
to call in money. dryden.
by powerful charms of gold and silver led.
the lombard bankers and the 'change to waste. dryden.
ba'nkruptcy. m. s. [from bankrupt.]
1. the state of a man broken, or bankrupt.
2. the act of declaring one's self bankrupt; as, he raised the
clamours of his creditors by a sudden bankruptcy.
bankrupt. adj. [banqueroute, fr. bancarotto, ital.] in debt
beyond the power of payment.
the king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man. shak.
sir, if you spend word for word with me,
i shall make your wit bankrupt. shakespeare.
it is said, that the money-changers of italy had benches pro-
bably in the burse or exchange, and that when any became
insolvent his banco was rotto, his bench was broke. it was once
written bankerout. bankerout is a verb.
o dainty bits
make rich the ribs, but bankerout the wits. shakespeare.
ba'nkrupt. n.s. a man in debt beyond the power of pay-
ment.
perkin gathered together a power, neither in number nor in
hardiness contemptible; but, in their fortunes, to be feared;
being bankrupts, and many of them felons. bacon.
it is with wicked men as with a bankrupt ; when his credi-
tors are loud and clamorous, and speak big, he giveth them
many good words. calamy.
in vain at court the bankrupt pleads his cause;
his thankless country leaves him to her laws. pope.
to bankrupt. v. a. to break; to disable one from satisfy-
ing his creditors. -
we cast off the care of all future thirst, because we are al-
ready bankrupted. hammond.
banner. m. s. [banniere, fr. banair, welch.]
1. a flag; a standard; a military ensign.
from france there comes a power, who already
have secret seize in some of our best ports, -
and are at point to shew their open banner. shakespeare.
all in a moment through the gloom were seen -
ten thousand banners rise into the air,
with orient colours waving. milton.
- he said no more;
but left his sister and his queen behind,
and wav'd his royal banney in the wind. idryden.
fir’d with such motives, you do well to join
with cato's foes, and follow caesar's banners. addison.
2. a streamer borne at the end of a lance, or elsewhere.
ba'nneret. n.s.. [from banner.] a knight made in the field,
with the ceremony of cutting off the point of his standard, and
making it a banner. they are next to barons in dignity; and
were anciently called by summons to parliament. blount.
a gentleman told henry, that sir richard croftes, made
banner et at stoke, was a wise man; the king answered, he
doubted not that, but marvelled how a fool could know.
- camden.
bannerql, more properly banderol. n.s.. [from bandercle,
fr.] a little flag or streamer.
*
o
king oswald had a bannerol of gold and purple set over his
tomb. camden.
bannian. n.s. a man's undress, or morning-gown; such
as is worn by the bannians in the east-indies.
ba'nnock, n.s. a kind of oaten or pease-meal cake, mixed
with water, and baked upon an iron plate over the fire; used
in the northern counties, and in scotland.
ba'nquet. n.s.. [banquet, fr. banchetto, ital. vanqueto, span.]
a feast; an entertainment of meat and drink.
if a fasting day come, he hath on that day a lanquet to
make. - hooker.
in his commendations i am fed;
it is a banquet to me. shakespeare.
you cannot have a perfect palace, except you have two
sides; a side for the banquet, and a side for the houshold ; the
one for feasts and triumphs, and the other for dweising.
baren.
shall the companions make a banquet of hird shall they
part him among the merchants j.b.
at that tasted fruit,
the sun, as from thyestean banquet, turn’d
his course intended. a silizn.
that dares prefer the toils of hercules
to dalliance, banquets, and ignoble ease. dryden.
to ba’nq, et. v. a. [from the noun.j. to treat any one with
feasts. -
welcome his friends,
visit his countrymen, and banquet them. shakespeare.
they were banqueted by the way, and the nearer they ap-
proached, the more encreased the nobility. , sirj. hayward.
to ba’s gy et. v. n. to feast; to fare daintily. -
‘i he mind shall banquet, tho’ the body pine:
fat paunches make lean pates, and dainty bits
make rich the ribs, but bankerout the wits. sha's rare.
so long as his innocence is his repast, he feasts and ban-
quets upon bread and water. south.
i purpos'd to unbend the evening hours,
and banquet private in the women's bow’rs. prior.
ba'nqg eter. m. s. [from banquet.]
1. a feaster; one that lives deliciously.
2. he that makes feafts. - - . -
ba'nog et-house. ! n: s [from banquet and hots...] a
ba'nqueting house. house where banquets are kept.
in a banqueting-house, among certain pleasant trees, the table
was set near to an excellent water-work. sidney.
but at the walk's end behold, how rais’d on high
- a banquet-house salutes the southern sky. dryden.
ban&amp;ve the. 71. s. [fr. in fortification.] a small bank at
the foot of the parapet, for the soldiers to mount upon when
they fire. - -
banstic le. m. s. a small fish, called also a stickleback. pun-
1 to us. -
to banter. v. a. [a barbarous word, without etymology,
unless it be derived from badiner, fr.] to play upon; to.
rally; to turn to ridicule; to ridicule.
the magistrate took it that he bantered him, and bade an
officer take him into custody. l'e/orange.
it is no new thing for innocent simplicity to be the subject
of bantering drolls. l'erange.
- * could alcinous' guests with-hold
from scorn or rage shall we, cries one, permit
his leud romances, and his bant'ring wit tate.
banter. n. s. [from the verb..] ridicule; raillery.
this humour, let it look never so filly, as it passes many
times for frolick and banter, is one of the most pernicious
snares in human life. - l'asirange.
metaphysicks are so necessary to a distinet conception, solid
judgment, and just reasoning on many subjects, that those who
ridicule it, will be supposed to make their wit and banter a re-
fuge and excuse for their own laziness. j%atts.
banterer. m. s. [from banter.] one that banters; a droll.
what opinion have these religious banterers of the divine
power or what have they to say for this mockery and con-
tempt : l'erange.
ba'norling. m. s. [if it has any etymology, it is perhaps cor-
rupted from the old word bairn, bairnling, a little child.]. a
little child : a low word.
if the object of their love
chance by lucina's aid to prove,
they seldom let the bantling roar,
in basket, at a neighbour's door. -
ba'pt is m. m. s. [baptismus, lat. 32.1, ros.]
1. an external ablution of the body, with a certain form of
words, which operates and denotes an internal ablution or
washing of the soul from original fin. ayliffe.
baptism is given by water, and that prescript form of words
which the church of christ doth use. hooker.
to his great baptism flock'd,
with awe, the regions round; and with them came
from nazareth the son of joseph deem’d,
unmarkt, unknown.
2. baptism is often taken in scripture for sufferings.
prior.
milton.
i have
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 216</div><p class="text">b a r
b a r
i have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am i strait-
ened till it be accomplished 2 - - luke.
bapti's mal. adj. [from baptism.] of or pertaining to bap-
tism.
when we undertake the baptismal vow, and enter on their
new life, it would be apt to discourage us. hammond.
ba'ptist. n.s.. [baptisle, fr. 3xwlyns...] he that administers
baptism. -
him the baptist soon
descry’d, divinely warn'd, and witness bore
as to his worthier. milton.
ba'ptistery. n.s.. [baptisterium, lat.] the place where the
sacrament of baptism is administred.
the great church, baptislery, and leaning tower, are well
worth seeing. addison.
7, bapti'ze. v. a. [baptiser, fr. from 32.1%.] to chri-
sten; to administer the sacrament of baptism to one.
he to them shall leave in charge,
to teach all nations what of him they learn'd,
and his salvation; them who shall believe,
baptizing in the profluent stream, the sign
of washing them from guilt of fin, to life
pure, and in mind prepar'd, if so befal,
for death, like that which the redeemer dy'd. milton.
let us refle&amp;t that we are christians ; that we are called by
the name of the son of god, and baptized into an irreconcile-
able enmity with sin, the world, and the devil. rogers.
baptitzer. n.s.. [from to baptize.] one that christens; one
that administers baptism.
bar. n.s.. [barre, fr.]
1. a piece of wood, iron, or other matter, laid cross a passage
to hinder entrance.
and he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards
from the one end to the other. exodus.
2. a bolt; a piece of iron or wood fastened to a door, and en-
tering into the post or wall to hold the door close.
the fish-gate did the sons of haffenaah build, who also laid
the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks
- thereof, and the bars thereof. nehemiah.
3. any obstacle which hinders or obstructs; obstruction.
1 brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors,
and said, hitherto shalt thou come, and no farther. job.
and had his heir surviv'd him in due course,
what limits, england, hadst thou found what bar p
what world could have resisted 2 daniel's civil war.
hard, thou know'st it, to exclude
spiritual substance with corporeal bar. milton.
must i new bars to my own joy create,
refuse myself, what i had forc'd from fate dryden.
fatal accidents have set -
a most unhappy bar between your friendship. rowe.
4. a rock, or bank of sand, at the entrance of a harbour or ri-
ver, which ships cannot sail over at low water.
5. anything used for prevention, or exclusion.
lest examination should hinder and let your proceedings,
behold, for a bar against that impediment, one opinion newly
added. hooker.
which salique land the french unjustly gloze to be
the founder of this law, and female bar. shakespeare.
6. the place where causes of law are tried, or where criminals
are judged ; so called from the bar placed to hinder crowds
from incommoding the court.
the great duke
came to the bar, where, to his accusations,
he pleaded still not guilty. shakespeare.
some at the bar with subtlety defend,
or on the bench the knotty laws untye. dryden.
7. an inclosed place in a tavern or coffeehouse, where the house-
keeper sits and receives reckonings.
i was under some apprehension that they would appeal to
me; and therefore laid down my penny at the bar, and made
the best of my way. addison.
8. [in law.] a peremptory exception against a demand or plea
brought by the defendant in an action, that destroys the aaion
of the plantiff for ever. it is divided into a bar to common
intent, and a bar special : a bar to a common intent, is an or-
dinary or general bar, that disables the declaration or plea of
the plaintiff: a bar special, is that which is more than ordi-
nary, and falls out in the case in hand, upon some special
circumstance of the fact. cowel.
bastardy is laid in bar of something that is principally com-
menced. - - ayliffe.
29. any thing by which the compages or structure is held to-
ether.
§ i went down to the bottoms of the mountains: the earth,
with her bars, was about me for ever. jonah.
10. anything which is laid across another, as bars in heraldry.
11. bar of gold or silver, is a lump or wedge from the mines,
melted down into a sort of mould, and never wrought.
12. bars of a horse. the upper part of the gums between the
tusks and grinders, which bears no teeth, and to which the
bit is applied, and, by its friction, the horse governed.
13. bars, in musick, are strokes drawn perpendicularly across
the lines of a piece of musick; used to regulate the beating
or measure of musical time.
14. bar, in african traffick, is used for a denomination of price;
payment being formerly made to the negroes almost wholly
in iron bars.
bar shot. n. s. two half bullets joined together by an iron
bar; used in sea engagements for cutting down the mass and
rigging.
to bar. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fasten or shut any thing with a bolt, or bar.
my duty cannot suffer
to obey in all your daughter's hard commands;
though their injunction be to bar my doors,
and let this tyrannous night take hold upon you. shakesp.
when you bar the window-shutters of your lady's bed-
chamber at nights, leave open the sashes to let in air. swift.
2. to hinder; to obstruct.
when law can do no right,
let it be lawful, that law bar no wrong.
3. to prevent; to exclude; to make impracticable.
the houses of the country were all scattered, and yet not
so far off as that it barred mutual succour. sidney.
doth it not seem a thing very probable, that god doth pur-
posely add, do after my judgments ; as giving thereby to un-
derstand, that his meaning in the former sentence was but to
bar similitude in such him; as were repugnant to his ordi-
nances, laws, and statutes : hooker.
4. to detain, by excluding the claimants: with fram.
hath he set bounds between their love and me *
i am their mother; who shall bar them from me?
5. to shut out: with from.
our hope of italy not only lost,
but shut from ev’ry shore, and barr'd from ev’ry coast.
dryden.
6. to exclude from use, right, or claim : with from before the
thing.
god hath abridged it, by barring us from some things of
shakespeare.
shak.
themselves indifferent. hooker.
give my voice on richard's fide,
to bar my master’s heirs in true descent
god knows i will not. shakes care.
his civil acts do bind and bar them all ;
and as from adam, all corruption take,
so, if the father's crime be capital, .
in all the blood, law doth corruption make. sir 7. davies.
it was thought sufficient not only to exclude them from that
benefit, but to bar them from their money. clarendon.
if he is qualified, why is he barred the profit, when he
only performs the conditions : collier on pride.
7. to prohibit.
for though the law of arms doth bar
the use of venom'd shot in war. hudibras.
what is a greater pedant than a mere man of the town 2
bar him the playhouses, and you strike him dumb. adson.
8. to except; to make an exception.
well, we shall see your bearing.—
-nay, but i bar to-night; you shall not gage me
by what we do to-night. shakespeare.
9. [in law.] to hinder the process of a suit.
but buff and belt men never know these cares;
no time, nor trick of law, their action bars :
their cause they to an easier issue put. dryden.
from such delays as conduce to the finding out of truth, a
criminal cause ought not to be barred. . ayliffs.
- if a bishop be a party to a suit, and excommunicates his ad-
versary, such excommunication shall not disable or bar his ad-
versary. ayliffe.
io. to bar a vein.
this is an operation performed upon the veins of the legs of
a horse, and other parts, with intent to stop the ralignant hu-
mours. it is done by opening the skin above it, disengaging
it, and tying it both above and below, and striking between
the two ligatures. \
barb. m. s. [barba, a beard, lat.]
1. anything that grows in the place of a beard.
he barbel, so called by reason of his barb or wattels at his
mouth, under his chaps. j/alton’s angler.
2. the points that stand backward in an arrow, or fishing-hook,
to hinder them from being extracted.
nor less the spartan fear'd, before he found
the shining barb appear abo's the wound.
3. the armour for horses.
their horses were naked, without any bakłs; for albeit many
brought barbs, few regarded to put them on. hayward.
barb. m. s. [contracted from barbary.] a barbary horse.
horses brought from barbary, are commonly of a slender
light size, and very lean, usually chosen for stallions. barbs,-
it is said, may die, but never grow old; the vigour and met-
tle of barbs never cease but with their life. parrier's dick.
to barb. v. a. [from the noun.] - -
1. to shave ; to dress out the beard.
pope's iliad.
shave
*
2
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 217</div><p class="text">b a r -
b a r
.
o
o:
o,
o
f
i.
shave the head, and tie the beard, and say it was the desire
of the penitent to be so barbed before his death. shakespeare.
2. to furnish horses with armour. see barbed.
a warriour train
that like a deluge pour'd upon the plain;
on barbed steeds they rode in proud array,
thick as the college of the bees in may.
3. to jag arrows with hooks.
the twanging bows
send showers of shafts, that on their barbed points
alternate ruin bear.
ba'rbacan. m. s. [barbarant, fr. barbacana, span.]
1. a fortification placed before the walls of a town.
within the barbacan a porter sate,
day and night duly keeping watch and ward:
nor wight, nor word mote pass out of the gate,
but in good order, and with due regard. fairy queen.
2. a fortress at the end of a bridge,
3. an opening in the wall through which the guns are levelled.
barbadof's cherry. [malphigia, lat.}
in the west indies, it rises to be fifteen or sixteen feet high,
where it produces great quantities of a pleasant tart fruit; pro-
pagated in gardens there, but in europe it is a curiosity. 44iller.
barea does tar. a bituminous substance, differing little from
the petroleum floating on several springs in england and scot-
land. if codward's method of fossils.
barba'rian. m. s. [barbarus, lat. it seems to have signified
at first only a foreign or a foreigner; but, in time, implied
some degree of wildness or cruelty.]
1. a man uncivilized; untaught; a savage.
proud greece, all nations else barbarians held,
boasting, her learning all the world excell’d. denham.
there were not different gods among the greeks and barba-
rians. - stillingsleet.
but with descending show’rs of brimstone fir’d,
the wild barbarian in the storm expir’d.
2. a foreigner.
i would they were barbarians, as they are,
though in rome litter'd. shakespeare's coriolanus.
3. a brutal monster; a man without pity: a term of reproach.
thou fell barbarian /
what had he done ! what could provoke thy madness
to assassinate so great, so brave a man! 4. philips.
barbarian. adj. belonging to barbarians; savage.
some felt the silent stroke of mould'ring age,
barbarian blindness. pope.
barba'rick. adj. [barbaricus, lat. in a different sense, it means
in latin wrought, fretted.] foreign; far-fetched.
the gorgeous east, with richest hand,
show’rs on her kings barbarick pearl and gold.
the eastern front was glorious to behold,
with diamond flaming, and barbarick gold. pope.
ba'rbaris m. m. s. [barbarisinus, lat.] -
1. a form of speech contrary to the purity and exactness of any
language.
the language is as near approaching to it, as our modern
barbarism will allow; which is all that can be expected from
any now extant. dryden's juvenal, dedication,
2. ignorance of arts; want of learning.
i have for barbarism spoke more
than for that angel knowledge you can say. shakespeare.
the genius of raphael having succeeded to the times of
barbarism and ignorance, the knowledge of painting is now
arrived to perfection. dryden's dufresnoy, preface.
3. brutality; savageness of manners; incivility.
moderation ought to be had in tempering and managing the
irish, to bring them from their delight of licentious barbarison,
* unto the love of goodness and civility. spenser's ireland.
divers great monarchies have risen from barbarism to civi-
lity, and fallen again to ruin. davies on ireland.
4. cruelty; barbarity; unpitying hardness of heart: not in use.
they must perforce have melted,
and barbarism itself have pitied him.
barba'rity. m. s. [from barbarao..]
1. savagencss; incivility.
2. cruelty; inhumanity.
and they did treat him with all the rudeness, reproach, and
dryden's fables.
philips.
addison-
par. lost.
shakesp. rich. ii.
barbarity imaginable. clarendon.
3. barbarism ; impurity of speech.
next petrarch followed, and in him we see,
what rhyme improv’d in all its height, can be
at best a pleasing sound, and sweet barbarity. dryden.
latin expresses that in one word, which either the barbarity
or narrowness of modern tongues cannot supply in more. dryd.
affected refinements, which ended by degrees in many bar-
barities, before the goths had invaded italy. swift.
barbarou.s. adj. [barbare, fr. 6:34:6.]
1. stranger to civility; savage; uncivilized.
what need i say more to you ? what ear is so barbarous,
but hath heard of amphialus * sidney.
the doubtful damsel dare not yet commit
her single person to their barbarous truth. fairy queen.
v cl. s.
thou art a roman; be not barbarous. shaos?, are,
he left governour, philip, for his country a phrygian, and for
manners more barbarous than he that set him there. 41arr.
a barbarous country must be broken by war, before it be
capable of government; and when subdued, if it be not well
- planted, it will estsoons return to barbarism. davies on ireland.
2. ignorant; unacquainted with arts.
they who restored painting in germany, not having those
reliques of antiquity, retained that barbarous manner. dryden.
3. cruel; inhuman.
by their barbarous usage, he died within a few days, to the
grief of all that knew him. claren.'….
barbarously. adv. [from barbarous.]
1. ignorantly; without knowledge or arts.
2. in a manner contrary to the rules of speech.
we barbarously call them blest,
while swelling coffers break their owners rest. stopny.
3. cruelly; inhumanly.
but yet you barbarously murder'd him. dryden.
she o it may prosper; but her mother used one of her
nieces very barbaroissy.
ba'rbarousness. n.s.. [from barbarous.]
1. incivility of manners.
excellencies of musick and poetry are grown to be little
more, but the one fiddling, and the other rhiming; and are
indeed very worthy of the ignorance of the friar, and the bar-
barousness of the goths. temple.
2. impurity of language.
it is much degenerated, as touching the pureness of speech;
being overgrown with barbarousness. brerewood.
3. cruelty.
the barbarousnes of the trial, and the persuasives of the
clergy, prevailed to antiquate it. hale's common law.
to barbecue. v. a. a term used in the west-indies for dres-
sing a hog whole; which, being split to the backbone, is laid
flat upon a large gridiron, raised about two foot above a char-
coal fire, with which it is surrounded.
oldfield, with more than harpy throat endu'd,
cries, send me, gods, a whole hog barbecu'd. pope.
ba'rbecue. n.s. a hog drest whole, in the west-indian manner.
bat bed. participial adj. [from to barb.]
1. furnished with armour.
his glittering armour he will command to rust, -
his barbed steeds to stables. shakespeare's richard ii.
2. bearded ; jagged with hooks or points. - -
if i conjecture right, no drizzling show'r,
but rattling storm of arrows barb'd with fire. milton.
ba'rbel. m. s. sbarbus, lat.]
1. a kind of fish found in rivers, large and strong, but coarse.
the barbel is so called, by reason of the barb or wattels at
his mouth, or under his chaps. j/alton's angler.
2. knots of superfluous flesh growing up in the channels of the
mouth of a horse. farrier's dic7.
ba'rber. m. s. [from to larb.] a man who shaves the beard.
his chamber being stived with friends or suitors, he gave his
legs, arms, and breasts to his servants to dress ; his head and
face to his barber; his eyes to his letters, and his ears to peti-
tioners. jwotton.
speciator.
thy boist'rous looks, . .
no worthy match for valour to assail,
but by the barber's razor best subdu'd.
what system, dick, has right averr'd
the cause, why woman has no beard?
in points like these we must agree; -
our barber knows as much as we. . prior.
to ba(rber. v. a. [from the noun..] to dress out; to powder.
our courteous antony,
whom ne'er the word of no, woman heard speak,
being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feast. , shaksp,
barber-ch1r u r g eon. n.s. a man who joins the practice
of surgery to the barber's trade; such as were all surgeons for-
merly, but now it is used only for a low practicer of surgery.
he put himself into barber-chirurgeons hands, who, by unfit
applications, rarified the tumour. wiseman's surgery,
barber-mong er. m. s. a word of reproach in shakespeare,
which seems to signify a fop; a man decked out by his barber.
draw, you rogue; for though it be night, the moon shines;
i'll make a sop of the moonshine of you; you whoreson, cul-
lionly, barber-monger, draw. shakespeare's king lear.
ba'rberry. m. s. [berberis, lat. or oxyacanthus...] pipperidge bush.
the species are, 1. the common barberry. 2. barberry
without stones. the first of these sorts is very common in
england, and often planted for hedges. al ziller,
barberry is a plant that bears a fruit very useful in house-
wifery; that which beareth its fruit without stones is counted
best. - mortimer,
bard. n.s. [bard, welch.] a poet.
there is amongst the irish a kind of people called bard,
which are to them instead of poets; whose profession is to set
forth the praises or dispraises of men in their poems or rhime;
the which are had in high regard and estimation among them.
spenser on ireland.
q_q and
milton.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 218</div><p class="text">b a r
and many hards that to the trembling chord,
can tune their timely voices cunningly. fairy 34cen.
the bard who first adorn'd our native tongue,
tun'd to his british lyre this ancient song,
which homer might without a blush rehearse.
bare. adj. [bane, sax. bar, dan.]
1. naked; without covering.
the trees are bare and naked, which use both to cloath and
house the kern. spenser on ireland.
then stretch'd her arms to embrace the body bare;
her clasping hands enclose but empty air. dryden.
in the old roman statues, these two parts were always bare,
and exposed to view, as much as our hands and face. addison.
2. uncovered in respect.
though the lords used to be covered whilst the commons
were bare, yet the commons would not be bare before the scot-
tish commissioners; and so none were covered. clarendon.
3. unadorned; plain; simple; without ornament.
yet was their manners then but bare and plain ;
for th’ antique world excess and pride did hate.
4. detected; no longer concealed.
these false pretexts and varnish'd colours failing,
bare in thy guilt, how foul thou must appear !
5. poor; indigent; wanting plenty.
were it for the glory of god, that the clergy should be left
as bare as the apostles, when they had neither staff nor scrip;
god would, i hope, endue them with the self-same affection.
hooker's preface.
even from a bare treasury, my success has been contrary to
drydon.
spensor.
milton.
that of mr. cowley. dryden.
6. mere; unaccompanied with usual recommendation.
it was a bare petition of a state
to one whom they had punish'd. shakespeare.
nor are men prevailed upon by bare words, only through a
defect of knowledge; but carried, with these puffs of wind,
contrary to knowledge. south.
7. threadbare; much worn.
you have an exchequer of words, and no other treasure for
your followers; for it appears, by their bare liveries, that they
live by your bare words. shakespeare.
8. not united with anything else.
a desire to draw all things to the determination of bare and
naked scripture, hath caused much pains to be taken in abating
the credit of man. hocker.
that which offendeth us, is the great disgrace which they
offer unto our custom of bare reading the word of god. hooker.
9. wanting cloaths; slenderly supplied with cloaths.
10. sometimes it has of before the thing wanted or taken away.
tempt not the brave and needy to despair;
for, tho' your violence should leave them bare
of gold and silver, swords and darts remain. dryden's juv.
making a law to reduce interest, will not raise the price of
land; it will only leave the country barer of money. locke.
to bar e. v. a. [from the adjective.] to strip; to make bare
or naked.
the turtle on the bared branch,
laments the wounds that death did launch. spensor.
there is a fabulous narration, that an herb groweth in the
likeness of a lamb, and feedeth upon the grass, in such sort as
it will bare the grass round about. bacon's natural history.
eriphyle here he found
baring her breast, yet bleeding with the wound. dryden.
he bar'd an ancient oak of all her boughs:
then on a rising ground the trunks he plac'd. dryden.
for virtue, when i point the pen,
bare the mean heart that lurks beneath a star;
can there be wanting to defend her cause,
lights of the church, or guardians of the laws? pope.
bare, or bore. the preterite of to bear. see to bear.
ba'rebon e. m. s. [from bare and bone..] lean, so that the bones
appear.
here comes lean jack, here eomes barebone; how long is it
ago, jack, fince thou sawest thy own knee : shakesp. hen. iv.
ba ref ace d. adj. [from bare and face.]
1. with the face naked; not masked.
your french crowns have no hair at all, and then you will
play barefaced. shakesp. midsummer's night's dream.
2. shameless; unreserved; without concealment; undisguised.
the animosities encreased, and the parties appeared bare-
faced against each other. clarendon.
it is most certain, that barefaced bawdry is the poorest pre-
tence to wit imaginable. dryden.
bar.efa cedily. adv. [from barefaced.] openly; shamefully;
without disguise.
though only some profligate wretches own it too bare-
facedly, yet, perhaps, we should hear more, did not fear tie
people's tongues. locke.
bar.efa’ce dness... m. s. [from barosaced.] effrontery; assu-
rance; audaciousness.
ba'refoot. adj. [from bare and foot..] having no shoes.
going to find a barefoot brother out,
one of our order. shakesp. romeo and juliet.
ba's efoot, adv. without shoes.
she must have a husband;
i must dance barefoot on her wedding day. shakspeare.
ambitious love hath so in me offended,
that barefoot plod i the cold ground upon
with sainted vow. shakespeare.
envoys describe this holy man, with his alcaydes about
him, standing barefoot, bowing to the earth. addison.
bare foot ed. adj. being without shoes.
he himself with a rope about his neck, barsooted, came to
offer himself to the discretion of leonatus. sidney.
ba'regna win. adj. [from bare and gnawn..] eaten bare.
- know my name is lost; *
by treason's tooth baregnawn and cankerbit. slak. k. lear:
bo roaded. adj. [from bare and head..] uncovered in re-
pect.
he, bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck,
bespoke them thus. shakes care’s richard ii.
next, before the chariot, went two men bareheaded. baczz.
the victor knight had laid his helm aside,
bareheaded, popularly low he bow’d. dryden's faber.
ba’rely. adv. [from bare.]
1. naked!y.
2. poorly; indigently.
3. without decoration.
4. merely; only ; without any thing more.
the external administration of his word is as well by reading
barely the scripture, as by explaining the same. ho:
- the duke of lancaster is dead;
and living too, for now his son is duke— -
barely in title, not in revenue. shakos. richard ii.
he barely nam'd the street, promis'd the wine;
but his kind wife gave me the very sign. dorne.
where the balance of trade barely pays for commodities with
commodities, there noney must be sent, or else the debts can-
not be paid. locks.
bar en ess. n. s. [from bare.]
i. nakedness.
so you serve us
till we serve you ; but when you have our roses
you barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves,
and mock us with our barens. shaftoffeare.
3. leanness. .
for their poverty, i know not where they had that; and
for their barenes, they never learned that of me. shaojeure.
3. poverty.
were it stripped of its privileges,and made as like the primi-
tive church for its barens; as its purity, it could legally want
all such privileges. szuto.
4. meanness of clothes.
bargain... n.s. shargen, welch; targaigne, fr.]
1. a contract or agreement concerning the sale of something.
what is marriage but a very bargain * wherein is sought as-
jiance, or portion, or reputation, with some desire of issue;
not the faithful nuptial union of man and wife. bacon.
no more can be due to me,
than at the bargain made was meant. donne.
2. the thing bought or sold; a purchase; the thing purchased.
give me but my price for the other two, and you shall even
have that into the bargain. l’e/orange-
he who is at the charge of a tutor at home, may give his
son a more genteel carriage, with greater learning into the
bargain, than any at school can do. locke-
3. stipulation; interested dealing.
there was a difference between courtefies received from
their master and the duke; for that the duke's might have ends
of utility and bargain; whereas their masters could not. bacon.
4. an unexpected reply; tending to obscenity.
where sold he bargains, whipstitch dryder.
as to bargains, few of them seem to be excellent, because
they all terminate into one fingle point. swift.
no maid at court is less asham’d,
howe'er for selling bargains fam'd. swift.
5. an event; an upshot: a low sense.
i am sorry for thy misfortune; however we must make the
best of a bad bargain. arbuthnot's history of j. bull.
6. in law.
bargain and sale is a contract or agreement made for ma-
nours, lands, &amp;c. also the transferring the property of them
from the bargainer to the bargainee. cowel.
7% ba’s gain. v. n. [from the noun..] to make a contract for
o sale or purchase of any thing; often with for before the
thing. -
henry is able to enrich his queen;
and not to seek a queen to make him rich.
so worthless peasants bargain for their wives, -
as market men for oxen, sheep, or horse. shakoff care.
for those that are like to be in plenty, they may be bargained
for upon the ground. bacon.
the thrifty state will bargain ere they fight. dryden.
it is possible the great duke may bargain for the republick of
lucca, by the help of his great treasures. addison on italy.
bar-
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 219</div><p class="text">b a r
**
o
o
:
o
bar.cainees. n.s.. [from bargain..] he or she that accepts a
bargain. see bargain.
ba'ro a 1ner. n.s.. [from bargain.] the person who profers,
or makes a bargain. see bargain.
barge. n.f. [bargie, dut. from barga, low lat.]
1. a boat for pleasure.
the barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne,
burnt on the water. - shakspeare.
plac'd in the gilded harge,
proud with the burden of so sweet a charge;
with painted oars the youths begin to sweep *2 or
, neptune's smooth face. waller.
2. a sea commander's boat.
it was consulted when i had taken my barge, and gone
ashore, that my ship should have set sail and left me. raleigh.
. a boat for burden.
ao. n. s. [from barge.] the manager of a barge.
many wafarers make themselves glee, by putting the in-
habitants in mind of this privilege; who again, like the cam-
pellians in the north, and the london bargers, forflow not
to baigne them. carew's survey of cornwall.
bark. n.s.. [barck, dan.]
1. the rind or covering of a tree.
trees last according to the strength and quantity of their
fap and juice; being well munited by their bark against the
injuries of the air. - bacon's natural history.
- wand'ring in the dark,
physicians for the tree have found the bark.
2. a small ship. [from barca, low lat.]
the duke of parma must have flown, if he would have come
into england; for he could neither get bark nor mariner to
put to sea. bacon on the is ar with spain.
it was that fatal and perfidious bark,
built in th’ eclipse, and rigg’d with curses dark,
dryden.
that sunk so low that sacred head of thine. milton.
who to a woman trusts his peace of mind,
trusts a frail bark with a tempestuous wind. granville.
to bar k. v. n. [beoncan, saxon.]
1. to make the noise which a dog makes when he threatens
or pursues.
sent before my time
into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
and that so lamely and unfashionably, -
that dogs bark at me. shakesp. richard iii.
why do your dogs bark so be there bears i' th' town 2
shakesp. merry isives of ił indsor.
in vain the herdman calls him back again;
the dogs stand off afar, and bark in vain.
2. to clamour at ; to pursue with reproaches.
vile is the vengeance on the ashes cold,
and envy base, to bark at sleeping fame.
you dare patronage
the envious barking of your saucy tongue,
against my lord shakeshcare.
7% bark. v. a. [from the noun..] to strip trees of their
bark.
the severest penalties ought to be put upon barking any tree
that is not felled. temple.
these trees, after they are barked, and cut into shape, are
tumbled down from the mountains into the stream. addison.
bark-bared. adj. [from bark and bare.] stripped of the
bark.
excorticated and bark-bared trees may be preserved, by nou-
rishing up a shoot from the foot, or below the stripped place
cutting the body of the tree sloping off a little above the shoot,
and it will heal, and be covered with bark. mortimer.
ba'rker. m. s. [from bark.]
i. one that barks or clamours.
what hath he done more than a base curf barked and made
a noise 2 had a fool or two to spit in his mouth but they are
rather enemies of my fame than me, these barkers. ben. johns.
2. [from bark of trees.] one that is employed in stripping
trces.
barky. adj. [from bark.] consisting of bark; containing
bark.
shakesp.
cowley.
fairy queen.
ivy so enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
barley. n.s. (derived by junius from n-, hordeum.]
it hath a thick spike; the calyx, husk, awn, and flower, are
like those of wheat or rye, but the awns are rough; the seed is
swelling in the middle, and, for the most part, ends in a sharp
point, to which the husks are closely united. the species are,
1. common long-eared barley. 2. winter or square barley, by
some called big. 3. sprat barley, or battledoor barley. all these
sorts of barley are sown in the spring of the year, in a dry time.
in some very dry light land, the barley is sown early in march;
but in strong clayey soils it is not sown till april. the square
larly or big, is chiefly cultivated in the north of england, and
in scotland ; and is hardier than the other sorts. miller.
barley is emollient, moistening, and expectorating ; barley
was chosen by hippocrates as a proper food in inflammatory
distempers. arbuthnot on aliments.
ba'rley brake. m. s. a kind of rural play.
by neighbours prais'd she went abroad thereby,
at barleybrake her sweet swift feet to try. sidn'y.
barley bro's h. r. s (from barley and broth.] a low word,
sometimes used for strong beer.
can sodden water,
a drench for surreyn'd jades, their barley broth,
decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat shakeshare.
barley corn. n.s. (from barly and corn.] a grain of bar-
ley; the beginning of our measure of length; the third part
of an inch.
a long, long journey, choak'd with breaks and thorns,
ill measur’d by ten thousand barley corns. 7 it is.l.
barley mow. n.s.. [from barley and mow.] the place where
reaped barley is flowed up.
whenever by yon barley mow i pass,
before my eyes will trip the tidy loss. gay.
barm. m. s. [burn, welch ; becom, sax } yeast ; the ferment
put into drink to make it work; and into bread, to lighten
and swell it. b
are you not he
that sometimes make the drink bear no brm,
mislead light wand'rers, laughing at their harm shakes.
try the force of imagination, upon staying the working of
beer when the barm is put into it. bon.
barmy., adj. [from tarm.] containing barm; yeafly.
their jovial nights in frolicks and in play
they pass, to drive the tedious hours away;
and their cold stomachs with crown'd goblets cheer,
of windy cider, and of barmy beer. - dryden.
barn. m. s. [bern, sax.] a place or house for laying up any
sort of grain, hay, or straw.
in vain the barns expect their promis'd load,
nor barns at home, nor reeks are heap'd abroad. dryden.
i took notice of the make of barns here: having laid a
frame of wood, they place, at the four corners, four blocks, in
such a shape as neither mice nor vermin can creep up. afton.
ba'rnacle. m. s. [probably of bearin, sax. a child, and aac, sax.
an oak. -
1. a kind of shell fish that grow upon timber that lies in the sea.
2. a bird like a goose, fabulously supposed to grow on trees.
it is beyond even an atheist's credulity and impudence, to
affirm that the first men might grow upon trees, as the story
goes about barnacles ; or might be the lice of some vast prodi-
gious animals, whose species is now extinet. bently.
and from the most refin'd of saints,
as naturally grow miscreants,
as barnacles turn soland geese
in th’ islands of the orcades. hudoras.
3. an instrument made commonly of iron for the use of farriers,
to hold a horse by the nose, to hinder him from struggling
when an incision is made. farrier's dick.
barometer. m. s. [from 24:22, weight,and *erkov, measure.]
a machine for measuring the weight of the atmosphere, and
the variations in it, in order chiefly to determine the changes
of the weather. it differs from the baroscope, which only
shews that the air is heavier at one time than another, without
specifying the difference. . the barometer is founded upon the
torricellian experiment, so called from torricelli the inventor
of it, at florence, in 1643; it is a glass tube filled with
mercury, horizontally sealed at one end; the other open and
immerged in a bason of stagnant mercury; so that, as the
weight of the atmosphere diminishes, the mercury in the tube
will descend, and, as it increases, the mercury will ascend; the
column of mercury suspended in the tube, being always equal
to the weight of the incumbent atmosphere.
the measuring the heights of mountains, and finding the
elevation of places above the level of the sea hath been much
promoted by barometrical experiments, founded upon that es-
sential property of the air, its gravity or pressure. as the co-
lumn of mercury in the barometer is counterpoised by a column
of air of equal weight, so whatever causes make the air heavier
or lighter, the pressure of it will be thereby increased or lessen-
ed, and of consequence the mercury will rise or fall. harris.
gravity is another property of air, whereby it counter-
poises a column of mercury from twenty-seven inches and one
half to thirty and one half, the gravity of the atmosphere va-
rying one tenth, which are its utmost limits; so that the ex.
act specifick gravity of the air can be determined when the
barometer stands at thirty inches, with a moderate heat of the
weather. arbrothnot on air.
barome’t rical. adj. [from barometer.] relating to the ba-
rometer.
he is very accurate in making barometrical and thermome-
trical instruments. derham's physico: theology.
baron. m. s. [the etymology of this word is very uncertain.
baro, among the romans, signified a brave warriour, or a bru-
tal man; and, from the first of these significations, aferage de-
rives baron, as a term of military dignity. others suppose it
originally to signify only a man ; in which sense baron or va-
ron, is still used by the spaniards; and, to confirm this conjec-
ture, our law yet uses baron and fomme, husband and wife.
others deduce it from ber, an old gaulish word, signifying
commander;
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 220</div><p class="text">b a r
b a r
commander; others from the hebrew ons), of the same im-
port. some think it a contraction of par homme, or peer,
which seems least probable.]
1. a degree of nobility next to a viscount. it may be probably
thought, that antiently, in england, all those were called ba-
rons, that had such signiories as we now call court barons. and
it is said, that, after the conquest, all such came to the parlia-
ment, and sat as nobles in the upper house. but when, by ex-
perience,it appeared, that the parliament was too much crouded
with such multitudes, it became a custom, that none should
come, but such as the king, for their extraordinary wisdom or
quality, thought good to call by writ; which writ ran hac vice
tantum. after that, men, seeing that this state of nobility was
but casual, and depending merely on the prince's pleasure, ob-
tained of the king letters patent of this dignity to them and
their heirs male: and these were called barons by letters patent,
or by creation; whose posterity are now those barons that are
called lords of the parliament; of which kind the king may
create more at his pleasure. it is nevertheless thought, that there
are yet barons by writ, as well as barons by letters patent, and
that they may be discerned by their titles; the barons by writ
being those, that to the title of lord have their own surnames
annexed; whereas the barons by letters patent, are named by
their baronies. these barons which were first by writ, may
now justly also be called barons by prescription; for that they
have continued barons, in themselves and their ancestors, be-
yond the memory of man. there are also barons by tenure,
as the bishops of the land, who, by virtue of baronies annexed
to their bishopricks, have always had place in the upper house
of parliament, and are called lords spiritual.
2. baron is an officer, as barons of the exchequer to the king: of
these the principal is called lord chief baron, and the three others
are his assistants, between the king and his subjects, in causes
of justice, belonging to the exchequer.
3. there are also barons of the cinque ports; two to each of the
seven towns, hastings, winchelsea, rye, rumney, hithe, do-
ver, and sandwich, that have places in the lower house of par-
liament. cowel.
they that bear
the cloth of state above, are four barons
of the cinque ports. shakespeare.
4. baron is used for the husband in relation to his wife. cowel.
5. a baron of beef is when the two firloins are not cut asunder,
but joined together by the end of the backbone. dicf.
ba'ron a.g.e. n.s.. [from baron.]
1. the body of barons and peers.
his charters of the liberties of england, and of the forest,
were hardly, and with difficulty, gained by his laronage at
staines, a. d. 1215. 11ale.
2. the dignity of a baron.
3. the land which gives title to a baron.
ba'ron ess. n.s.. [baronosa, ital. baronissa, lat.] a baron's lady.
ba'ron et. m. s. [of baron and et, diminutive termination.] the
lowest degree of honour that is hereditary; it is below a baron
and above a knight; and has the precedency of all other knights,
except the knights of the garter. it was first founded by king
james i. a. d. 1611. cowel. but it appears by the follow-
ing passage, that the term was in use before, though in another
sense.
king edward iii, being bearded and crossed by the clergy,
was advised to direct out his writs to certain gentlemen of
the best abilities, entitling them therein barons in the next
parliament. by which means he had so many barons in his
parliament, as were able to weigh down the clergy; which
barons were not afterwards lords, but baronets, as sundry of
them do yet retain the name. spenser.
ba'rony. n.s.. [baronnie, fr. becnny, sax.] that honour or
lordship that gives title to a baron. such are not only the fees
of temporal barons, but of bishops also. cowel.
ba'roscop e. m. s. [33;&amp;” and azowia.] an instrument to shew
the weight of the atmosphere. see barom eter.
if there was always a calm, the equilibrium could only be
changed by the contents ; where the winds are not variable,
the alterations of the baroscope are very small. arbuthnot.
ba'rracan. m. s. [bouracan, or barracan, fr.] a strong thick
kind of camelot.
ba'rra ck. m. s. [barracca, span.]
1. little cabbins made by the spanish fishermen on the sea shore;
or little lodges for soldiers in a camp.
2. it is generally taken among us for buildings to lodge soldiers.
barra to r. n. s. [from larat, old fr. from which is still retained
barateur, a cheat..] a wrangler, and encourager of law suits.
will it not refle&amp;t as much on thy character, nic, to turn
barrator in thy old days, a stirrer up of quarrels amongst thy
neighbours ? arbuthnot's history of j. bull.
barratry. n.s.. [from barrater.] the practice or crime of
a barrator; foul practice in law.
'tis arrant barratry, that bears
point blank an action 'gainst our laws.
barrel. n.f. [baril, welch.]
i. a round wooden vessel to be stopped close.
it hath been observed by one of the ancients, that an empty
hudibras.
barrel knocked upon with the finger, giveth a diapason to the
sound of the like barrel full. baczz-
trembling to approach
the little barrel, which he fears to broach. dryden.
2. a particular measure in liquids. a barrel of wine is thirtv-
one gallons and a half ; of ale, thirty-two gallons; of beer,
thirty-six gallons, and of beer vinegar, thirty-four gallons.
3. [in dry measure.] a barrel of essex butter contains one hundred
and fix pounds; of suffolk butter, two hundred and fifty-six.
a barrel of herrings should contain thirty-two gallons wine
measure, holding usually a thousand herrings.
several colleges, instead of limiting their rents to a certain
sum, prevailed with their tenants to pay the price of so many
barrels of corn, as the market went. swift.
4. anything hollow ; as, the barrel of a gun; that part which
holds the shot.
take the barrel of a long gun pe festly bored, set it upright
with the breech upon the ground, and take a bullet exactly fit
for it; then if you fuck at the mouth of the barrel ever so
gently, the bullet will come up so forcibly, that it will hazard
the striking out your teeth. digt;.
5. a cylinder; frequently that cylinder about which anything
is wound.
your string and bow must be accommodated to your drils;
if too weak, it will not carry about the barrel. 44.22.
6. barrel of the ear, is a cavity behind the tympanum, covered
with a fine membrane. dz.
to bat rel. v. a. [from the noun..] to put any thing in a
barrel for preservation,
i would have their beef beforehand barrelled, which may be
used as is needed. sfenser on irelano.
barrel up earth, and sow some seed in it, and put it in the
bottom of a pond. bacon.
bo biture. adj. [from barrel and to..] having a large
elly.
dauntless at empty noises; lofty neck'd,
sharp headed, barrel-belly'd, broadly back'd. dryder.
bat&amp;ren. adj. ibane, sax, naked; properly applied to trees
or ground unfruitful, j
1. without the quality of producing its kind; not prolifick; ap-
plicd to animals. -
they hail'd him father to a line of kings.
upon my head they plac'd a fruities crown,
and put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
no son of mine succeeding. shakes care.
there shall not be male or female larren among you, or
among your cattle. deuteronomy.
2. unfruitful; not fertile; sterile.
the situation of this city is pleasant, but the water is naught,
and the ground barren. 2 koo.
telemachus is far from exalting the nature of his country &gt;
he confesses it to be barren, pope:
3. not copious ; scanty. -
some schemes will appear barren of hints and matter, but
prove to be fruitful. swift.
4. unmeaning ; uninventive; dull. -/
there be of them that will make themselves laugh, to set
on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too. siak, care.
barrenly. adv. [from barren.] unfruitfully.
ba‘rrenness. n.s.. [from barren.]
1. want of offspring; want of the power of procreation.
i pray'd for children, and thought larrenns;
in wedlock a reproach.
no more be mention'd then of violence
against ourselves; and wilful barrennys,
that cuts us off from hope.
2. unfruitfulness; sterility; infertility.
within the self-same hamlet, lands have divers degrees of
value, through the diversity of their fertility or barrannos.
bacan.
3. want of invention; want of the power of producing any
thing new.
the adventures of ulysses are imitated in the aeneis; tho’
the accidents are not the fame, which would have argued him
of a total barrenness of invention. - dryden.
4. want of matter; scantiness.
the importunity of our adversaries hath constrained us
longer to dwell than the barrenness of so poor a cause could
have seemed either to require or to admit. heaker-
5. [in theology..] aridity; want of emotion or sensibility.
the greatest saints sometimes are fervent, and sometimes
feel a barrennes of devotion. taylor.
barren wort. n.s. [epimedium, lat..] the name of a plant.
barrfu l. adj. [from bar and full.] full of obstructions.
a barrful strife
whoe'er i woo, myself would be his wife.
barrica'de. n.s.. [barricade, fr.]
1. a fortification made in haste, of trees, earth, waggons, or any
thing else, to keep off an attack. -
2. any stop ; bar; obstruction.
there must be such a barricade, as would greatly annoy, or
absolutely stop, the currents of the atmosphere. derham.
asion.
miltor.
shakespeare.
3 ts
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 221</div><p class="text">b a r
b a s
o
k
to barr1ca'de. v. a. [barricader, fr.]
1. to stop up a passage.
now all the pavement sounds with trampling fect,
and the mixt hurry barricades the street,
entangled here, the waggon's lengthen'd team. gay.
2. to hinder by stoppage. -
a new vulcano continually discharging that matter, which
being till then barricaded up, and imprisoned in the bowels of
the earth, was the occasion of very great and frequent calami-
ties. j7'oodward.
barrica'no. m. s. sharricada, span.] a fortification; a bar ;
any thing fixed to hinder entrance.
the access was by a neck of land, between the sea on one
part, and the harbour water, or inner sea on the other; for-
tified clean over with a strong rampier and barricado. bacon.
to barrica'do. v. a. [from the noun..] to fortify; to bar ;
to stop up.
fast we found, fast shut
the dismal gates, and barricado'd strong ! milion.
he had not time to barricado the doors; so that the enciny
entered. clarendon.
the truth of causes we find so obliterated, that it seems
almost barricadoed from any intelle&amp;tual approach. harvey.
ba'rrier. m.s.. [barriere, fr.] it is sometimes pronounced with
the accent on the last syllable, but it is placed more properly
on the first.
1. a barricade ; an entrenchment.
safe in the love of heav'n an ocean flows
around our realm, a barrier from the foes. pope.
2. a fortification, or strong place, as on the frontiers of a coun-
try.
the queen is guarantee of the dutch, having possession of
the barrier, and the revenues thereof, before a peace. swift.
3. a stop; an obstruction.
if you value yourself as a man of learning, you are build-
ing a most impassable barrier against improvement. j/atts.
4. a bar to mark the limits of any place. -
for justs, and tourneys, and barriers, the glories of them
are chiefly in the chariots, wherein the challengers make their
entries. bacon.
pris'ners to the pillar bound,
at either barrier plac’d; nor, captives made,
be freed, or arm’d anew. dryden.
5. a boundary ; a limit.
but wave whate'er to cadmus may belong,
and fix, o muse, the barrier of thy song, -
at oedipus. pope's statius.
how instinet varies in the groveling swine,
compar’d, half reas’ning elephant with thine:
*twixt that and reason, what a nice barrier /
for ever sep'rate, yet for ever near. pope.
ba'rr1st er. m. s. [from bar.] a person qualified to plead
causes, called an advocate or licentiate in other countries and
courts. outer barristers are pleaders without the bar, to di-
ftinguish them from inner barrislers ; such are the benchers,
or those who have been readers, the council of the king,
queen, and princes, who are admitted to plead within the
bar. a counsellor at law. blount. chambers.
ba'rrow. n. s. [benepe, sax. supposed by skinner to come from
bear.] any kind of carriage moved by the hand, as a hand-
barrow ; a frame of boards, with handles at each end, carried
between two men, a wheel-barrow; that which one man pushes
forward by raising it upon one wheel.
have i lived to be carried in a basket, like a barrow of
butcher's offal, and thrown into the thames : shakspeare.
no barrow's wheel
shall mark thy stocking with a miry trace. gay.
ba'rrow. m. s. [bens, sax.] a hog; whence barrow grease,
or hog's lard.
barrow, whether in the beginning or end of names of places,
signifies a grove; from beanpe, which the saxons used in the
same sense. gibson.
barrow is likewise used in cornwall for a hillock, under which,
in old times, bodies have been buried.
to batter. v. n. [baratter, fr. to trick in traffick; from
barat, craft, fraud.] to traffick by exchanging one commo-
dity for another, in opposition to purchasing with money.
as if they scorn'd to trade and barter,
by giving or by taking quarter. hudibras.
a man has not every thing growing upon his soil, and
therefore is willing to barter with his neighbour. collier.
to ba'rter. v. a. **
1. to give any thing in exchange for something else,
for him was i exchang'd and ranfom'd ;
but with a baser man of arms by far,
once, in contempt, they would have barter'd me. shaks).
then as thou wilt dispose the rest,
to those who, at the market rate,
2. sometimes it is used with the particle away before the thing
! ven.
if they will barter away their time, methinks they should at
least have some ease in exchange. decay of piety.
he also bartered away plums that would have rotted in a
week, for nuts that would last good for his eating a whole
year. locke.
barter, n. s. [from the verb.] the act or practice of traf-
ficking by exchange of commodities; sometimes the thing
given in exchange.
from england they may be furnished with such things as
they may want, and, in exchange or barter, send other things,
with which they may abound. bacon.
!e who corrupteth english with foreign words, is as wise
as ladies that change plate for china; for which, the laudable
traffick of old clothes is much the fairest bar ter. felton.
barterer. m. s. [from barter.] he that trafficks by exchange
of commodities. -
bart er y. m. s. [from barter.] exchange of commodities.
it is a received opinion, that, in most ancient ages, there
was only bartery or exchange of commodities amongst most
nations. camden's remains.
ba'rtram. m. s. a plant; the same with pellitory.
ba'rton. m. s. the demesne lands of a manour; the manour-
house itself; and sometimes the out-houses. blount.
base. adj. [bas, fr. boss, ital, baxo, span. basis, low latin;
(32.71:..] -
1. mean; vile; worthless: of things. -
the harvest white plumb is a base plumb, and the white
date plumb are no very good plumbs. bacon.
pyreicus was only famous for counterfeiting all base things,
as earthen pitchers, a scullery; whereupon he was surnamed
rupographus. pea ham.
2. of mean spirit; disingenuous; illiberal; ungenerous; low ;
without dignity of sentiment: of persons.
since the perfections are such in the party i love, as the feel-
ing of them cannot come unto any unnoble heart; shall that
heart, lifted up to such a height, be counted base ? sidney.
it is base in his adversaries thus to dwell upon the excesses
of a passion. atterbury,
3. of low station; of mean account; without dignity of rank;
without honour.
if the lords and chief men degenerate, what shall be hoped
of the peasants and baser people : spenser on ireland.
if that rebellion
came like itself, in base and abject routs,
you reverend father, and these noble lords,
had not been here. shakspeare.
it could not else be, i should prove so base,
to sue and be denied such common grace. shakespeare.
and i will yet be more vile than this, and will be base in
mine own fight. 2 sam.
insurrections of base people are commonly more furious in
their beginnings. bacon.
he whose mind
is virtuous, is alone of noble kind ;
though poor in fortune, of celestial race,
and he commits the crime who calls him base. dryden.
4. base-born ; born out of wedlock, and by consequence of no
honourable birth; illegitimate.
why bastard wherefore base ?
when my dimensions are as well compact
as honest madam's issue. shakspeare.
this young lord lost his life with his father in the field, and
with them a base son. camden's remains.
5. applied to metals: without value. it is used in this sense of
all metal except gold and silver.
a guinea is pure gold, if it has nothing but gold in it, with-
out any alloy or baser metal. waits.
6. applied to sounds: deep 5 grave. it is more frequently writ-
ten bass, though the comparative laser seems to require bose.
in pipes, the lower the note holes be, and the further from
the mouth of the pipe, the more base sound they yield. lacon.
bas e-bor n. adj. born out of wedlock.
but see thy base-born child, thy babe of shame,
who, left by thee, upon our parish came. gay.
base-cou rt. n.s.. [has cour, fr. j lower court; not the chief
court that leads to the house; the back-yard ; the farm yard.
my lord, in the base-court he doth attend,
to speak with you.
base-minded. adj. mean-spirited ; worthless.
it signifieth, as it secmeth, no more than abject, base-minded,
false-hearted, coward, or nidget. camden's remains.
base-viol. n. s. [usually written bass-viol.] an instrument
which is used in concerts for the base sound.
at the first grin he cast every human feature out of his
countenance; at the second, he became the head of a base viol.
addison.
shakespeare.
can barter honour for estate. prior. base. n.s.. [has, fr. boss, lat.]
1 see nothing left us, but to truck and barter our goods, 1. the bottom of any thing; commonly used for the lower
like the wild indians, with each other. swift. part of a building, or column.
vol. i.
r r what
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 222</div><p class="text">b a s
b a s -
what if it tempt thee tow'rd the flood, my lord
or to the dreadful summit of the cliff,
that beetles o'er his base into the sea. shałospeare.
firm dorick pillars found your solid has ;
the fair corinthian crowns the higher space. dryden.
and all below is strength, and all above is grace,
columns of polish'd marble firmly set
on golden losis, are his legs and feet.
2. the pedestal of a statue.
men of weak abilities in great place, are like little statues
set on great bases, made the less by their advancement. bacon.
mercury was patron of flocks, and the ancients placed a ram
at the lase of his images. broome.
3. that part of any ornament which hangs down, as housings.
phalasius was all in white, having his base, and caparion
embroidered. sidney.
4. the broad part of any body; as the bottom of a cone.
5. stockings, or perhaps the armour for the legs, from bas, fr.
nor shall it e'er be said that wight,
with gauntlet blue and bass white,
and round blunt truncheon by his side,
so great a man at arms defy'd. hudibras.
6. the place from which racers or titlers run; the bottom of the
fidd; the carcer, the starting-post.
he said; to their appointed has they went ;
with beating heart th’ cxpecting sign receive,
and, starting all at once, the barrier leave.
7. the string that gives a base sound.
at thy well sharpen'd thumb, from shore to shore,
the trebles queak for fear, the bases roar. i}ry len.
8. an old rustick play written by skinner, bays; and in some
counties called prison lars.
he with two striplings (lads, more like to run
the country base, than to commit such slaughter)
make good the passage. shakspeare.
to bas e. v. a. [basier, fr.] to embase; to make less valu-
able by admixture of meaner metals.
i am doubtful whether men have sufficiently refined metals,
which we cannot base ; as, whether iron, brass, and tin be re-
prizr.
drydon.
fined to the height. bacon.
ba'sely, adv. [from base.]
1. in a base manner; meanly; dishonourably.
the king is not himself, but basily led
by flatterers. soakespeare.
a lieutenant boso gave it up, as soon as essex in his pas-
fage demanded it. clarendon.
with broken vows his fame he will not stain,
with conquest basey bought, and with inglorious gain.
dryden.
2. in bastardy. -
these two mitylene brethren, losoy born, crept out of a
small galliot unto the majesty of great kings. knolles.
ba's en ess. m. s. [srom base.]
1. meanness ; vileness; badness.
such is the power of that sweet passion,
that it all sordid bosons, doth expel. speoser.
your soul's above the baseness of distrust:
nothing but love could make you so unjust. dryden.
when a man's folly must be spread open before the angels,
and all his basings; ript up before those pure spirits, this will be
a double hell. south.
2. vileness of metal.
we alledged the fraudulent obtaining his patent, the bas-
nes of his metal, and the prodigious sum to be coined. swift.
3. bastardy; illegitimacy of birth.
why brand they us
with base? with bosons, p bastardy ?
4. deepness of sound.
the just and measured proportion of the air percussed to-
wards the basenos or trebleness of tones, is one of the greatest
secrets in the contemplation of sounds. bacon.
to bash. v. n. [probably from base.] to be ashamed ; to be
confounded with shame.
his countenance was bold, and bos”: "not
for guyon's looks, but scornful eye-glance at him shot. spen.
basha’w. m. s. [sometimes written bassa.] a title of honour
and command among the turks; the viceroy of a province ;
the general of an army.
the turks made an copedition into persia; and because
of the straits of the mountains, the bashaw consulted which
way they should get in. bacon.
ba's of u l. adj. [this word, with all those of the same race,
are of uncertain etymology. skinner imagines them derived
from bas, or mean ; a firshow, from verbas n, dut. to strike
with astonishment; junios, from 33ris, which he finds in
hoschius to signify shame. the conjecture of minshaw
seems most probable.]
1. modest ; shamefaced.
i never tempted her with word too large;
but, as a brother to his sister, shew’d
bashful sincerity, and comely love.
shakespeare.
sha's eart.
2. sheenish; viciously modest. * *
he looked with an almost losul kind of modesty, as if he
feared the eyes of man. sidney.
hence, bashful cunning !
and prompt me plain and holy innocence. słakoffeare.
our author, anxious for his fame to night,
and losul in his first attempt to write, -
lies cautiously obscure. zodson,
ba's of ully. adv. [from bassal.] timorously; modestly.
la’s hfuln ess. m. s. [from basisul.]
1. modesty, as shewn in outward appearance. -
philoclea a little mused how to cut the thread even, with
eyes, checks and lips, whercos each sang their part, to make
up the harmony of bas's, moss. sidney.
such looks, such boofulness might well adorn
the checks of youths that are more nobly born. dryden,
2. vicious or rustick shame.
for fear had bequeathed his room to his kinsman his solos,
to teach him good manners. sido.
there are others who have not altogether so much of this
foolish bas' folness, and who ask every one's opinion. dryo.g.
ba's il. m. s. [cornum, lat. j the name of a plant.
ba’s ii.. n.s. the angle to which the cdge of a joiner's tool
is ground away. see to basil.
ba's 11... m. s. the skin of a sheep ta:ncil.
more properly written basen.
to ba’s l. v. a. to grind the edge of a tool to an angle.
these chistols are not ground to such a basil as the joiners
chisiels on one of the sides, but are losed away on both the
flat sides ; so that the edge lies between both the sides in the
middle of the tool. 44-xon.
bas i'lic a. m. s. [327.2%%.] the middle vein of the arm so
called, by way of pre-eminence. it is likewise attributed to
many medicines or the same reason. &amp;uiny.
basilic al. adj. [from lassica. see basilic a.] belonging
bas i's ick. } to the basilick vein.
these aneurisms following always upon bleeding the left-
lick vein, must be aneurisms of the humeral artery. sharp.
basi lick. m. s. [losilique, fr. 32.2%:..] a large hall, having
two ranges of pillars, and two isles or wings, with galleries
over them. these basilicks were first made for the palaces of
princes, and afterwards converted into courts of justice, and
lastly into churches; whence a basilick is generally taken for a
magnificent church, as the basick of st. peter at rome. . .
basi licos. m. s. [327,xizov.] an ointment called also tetra-
pharmacon. .oincy.
i made incision into the cavity, and put a pledget of boicot
over it. 1//eman.
ba'silisk, n, s. [losilsou, lat. of zooxo, of £27,5:…, a
king.]
1. a kind of serpent, called also a cockatrice, which is said to
drive away all others by his hising, and to kill by looking.
make me not fighted like the basilis. ;
i've look'd on thousands who have sped the better
by my regard, but kill'd none so. shakosheare.
the basilisk was a serpent not above three palms long, and
differenced from other serpents by advancing his head, and
some white marks or coronary spots upon the crown.
brown's /ugar erreurs.
this is i believe
2. a species of cannon or ordnance.
we practise to make swifter motions than any you have :
and to make them fronger and more violent than yours are ;
exceeding your greatest cannons and losis's. bacon.
ba's in. m. s. [basin, fr. bacile, lacino, ital. it is often written
boson, but not according to etymology.]
1. a small vessel to hold water for washing, or other uses.
let one attend him with a silver basin,
full of rosewater, and bestrew’d with flowers. soaks?.
we have little wells for infusions, where the waters take
the virtue quicker and better, than in vessels and bosons. bacon.
we behold a piece of silver in a basin, when water is put
upon it, which we could not discover before, as under the
verge thereof. brown's sugar erroir.
2. a small pond.
on one side of the walk you see this hollow basin, with its
several little plantations lying conveniently under the eye of
the beholder. speciator.
3. a part of the sea inclosed in rocks, with a narrow entrance.
the jutting land two ample bays divides;
the spacious basins arching rocks inclose,
a sure defence from ev’ry storm that blows.
4. any hollow place capacious of liquids.
if this rotaticn does the seas affect,
the rapid motion rather would eject
the stores, the low capacious caves contain,
and from its ample lason cast the main.
5. a dock for repairing and building ships.
6. in anatomy, a round cavity situated between the 2nterior ven-
tricles of the brain. -
7. a concave piece of mctal by which glass-grinders form their
convex glasses.
pop!,
* * * ---
ba, ore,
8. a
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 223</div><p class="text">b a s
i3 a s
;
'k
8. a round shell or case of iron placed over a furnace in which
hatters mould the matter of a hat into form.
9. eos: s of a bai.nze : the same with the scales; one to hold
the weight, the other the thing to be weighed.
i. a sis. r. s. slo, lat. j
1. tre foundation of any thing, as of a column or a building.
it must follow, that paradise, being raised to this height,
just have the compass of the whole earth for a loft, and foun-
dation. raleigh.
ascend my chariot, guide the rapid wheels
that shake heav'n's losis. milton.
in altar wise a stately pile they rear;
the basis broad below, and top advanc'd in air. dryden.
2. the lowest of the three principal parts of a column, which
are the basis, shoff, and capital.
observing an english inscription upon the boss, we read
it over scveral times. addison.
3. that on which any thing is raised.
such seems thy gentle height, made only proud
to be the basis of that pompous load,
than which a nobler weight no mountain bears. denham.
4. the pedestal.
how many times shall caesar bleed in sport,
that now on pompey's basis lies along
no worthier than the dust f
5- the ground work or first principle of any thing.
shakespeare.
build me thy fortune upon the boss of valour. shakesp.
the friendships of the world are oft -
confederacies in vice, or leagues of pleasure;
ours has severest virtue for its basis. addison.
7% bask. v. a. [backeren, dut. skinner.] to warm by laying
out in the heat: used almost always of animals.
and stretched out all the chimney's length,
basks at the fire his hairy strength. milton.
he was basking himself in the gleam of the sun. l'e/irange.
'tis all thy business, business how to shun,
to bask thy naked body in the sun.
to bask. v. n. to lie in the warmth.
about him, and above, and round the wood,
the birds that haunt the borders of his flood;
that bath'd within, or bask'd upon his side,
to tuneful songs their narrow throats apply'd,
unlock'd, in covers let her freely run,
to range thy courts, and bask before the sun.
some in the fields of purest aether play,
and baft and whiten in the blaze of day. pope.
ba's ket. m. s. [basged, welch ; bascauda, lat. barbara depicis
venit lascaida britannis. martial.] a vessel made of twigs,
rushes, or splinters, or some other slender bodies interwoven.
here is a basket; he may creep in, and throw foul linen upon
dryden.
dryden.
tickell.
him, as if going to bucking. shakespeare.
thus while i sung, my sorrows i deceiv'd,
and bending osiers into baskets weav'd. dryden.
poor peg was forc'd to go hawking and peddling ; now and
then carrying a basket of fish to the market. arbuthnot.
ba's ket-hilt. n. s. [from basket and hilt..] a hilt of a wea-
pon so made as to contain the whole hand, and defend it from
being wounded.
his puissant sword unto his side,
near his undaunted heart, was ty'd :
with basket-hilt, that would hold broth,
and serve for fight and dinner both. hudibras.
their beef they often in their murrions stew’d,
and in their basket-hists their bev’rage brew’d. king.
ba's ket-wool an. m. s. [from basket and woman.] a woman
that plies at markets with a basket, ready to carry home any
thing that is bought.
bass. n.s.. [supposed by jun’us to be derived, like basket, from
some british word signifying a rush ; but perhaps more properly
written boss, from the french base.] a mat used in churches.
having woollen yarn, boss mat, or such like, to bind them
withal. 44%rtimer's hussandry.
7% bass. v. n. to sound in a deep tone.
the thunder
that deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounc'd
the name of prosper: it did bass my trespass.
bass. adj. [see base.]. in musick, grave; deep.
isass-relief. m. s. [from bas, and relief, raised work, fr.]
sculpture, the figures of which do not stand out from the
ground in their full proportion. felilien distinguishes three
kinds of bas-relief: in the first, the front figures appear almost
with the full relief; in the second, they stand out no more than
one half; and, in the third, much less, as in coins.
}ass-viol. see base-viol.
on the sweep of the arch lies one of the muses, playing on
a bas, viol. dryden.
ra'ss a. sce bash aw.
ba’ss et. n.s.. [baset, fr.] a game at cards, invented at ve-
in icc.
gamesters would no more blaspheme; and lady dabcheek's
best bank would be broke. dennis.
basso relie/o. [ital.] see bass-relief.
shakespeare.
paston. } m. s. slason, fr.] a musicol is sorument of the
bassoos. 5 wind kind, blown with a recd, and furnished
with eleven holes, which are stopped like other large flutes;
its diameter at bottom is nine inches, and it serves for the
bass in concerts of hautboys, &amp;c. to evoux.
ba'ssock: "... s. the same with boss.
ba stard. m. s. sha/hardt, welch, of low birth; bossardo, fr.]
1. board, according to the civil and canon law, is a person
born of a woman out of wedlock, or not married; so that,
according to order of law, his father is not known. a lift.
him to the lydian king lycimpia bare,
and sent her boasted bastard to the war. drydon.
2. any thing spurious or false.
- words
but rooted in your tongue; kaffard, and solables
of no allowance to your bosom's truth. shakes eare.
3. a kind of sweet wine.
score a pint of bo/?ard—
then your brown bastard is your only drink.
ba's tard. adj. [from the noun.]
1. begotten out of wedlock; illegitimate.
peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy, insensible, a getter of
more bassard children than war's a destroyer of men. shakesh.
2. spurious; not genuine; supposititious; false; adulterate. in
this sense, anything which bears some relation or resemblance
to another, is called spurious or basiard.—
you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you
are not the jew's daughter. that were a kind of bossard
hope indeed. shakespeare.
men who, under the disguise of publick good, pursue their own
designs of power, and such baffard honours as attend them. 7am.
ba's tard cedar tree. [called guazuma in the west indies.]
7%. ba's tard. v. n. [from the noun..] to convict of being a
bastard ; to stigmatize with bastardy. -&gt;
she lived to see her brother beheaded, and her two sons de-
posed from the crown, bylarded in their blood, and cruelly
murdered.
to ba star dize. v. a. [from lossard.]
1. to convict of being a bastard.
2. to beget a bastard. -
i should have been what i am, had the maidenies star in
the firmament twinkled on my basiardizing. shakspeare.
ba's tarply. adj. [from bassard.j. in the manner of a beliard 5
spuriously.
good seed degenerates, and of obeys
the soil's disease, and into cockle strays ;
let the mind's thoughts but be transplanted so
into the body, and ba/lardy they grow. donne.
ba's tardy. n.f. [from bastard.] an unlawful flate of birth,
which disables the bastard, both according to the laws of god
and man, from succeeding to an inheritance, ayliffe.
once she slandered me with bo/lardy; ./
but whether i be true begot, or no,
shakoff.
bacon,
that still i lay upon my mother's head. shaf:ffeare.
in respc&amp;t of the evil consequents, the wife's adultery is
worse, as bringing lastardy into a family. taylor.
no more of ba/lardy in heirs of crowns. pope.
to baste. v. a. participle pass. based, or bassen. [bosonner,
fr. bazata, in the armorick dialect, signifies to flrike with .
stick; from which perhaps basion a slick, and all its derivatives,
or collaterals, may be deduced.] -
i. to beat with a stick.
quoth she, i grant it is in vain
for one that's based to feel pain;
because the pangs his bones endure,
contribute nothing to the cure. iiidoras.
bostings heavy, dry, obtuse,
only dulness can produce;
while a little gentle jerking
sets the spirits all a-working. swift.
2. to drip butter, or anything else, upon meat as it turns upon
the spit.
sir, i think the meat wants what i have, a hafting. saks.
3. to moisten meat on the spit by faijing upon it.
the fat of roasted mutton falling on the birds, will serve to
base them, and so save time and butter. - swift.
4. to sew slightly; [hosler, fr. to stitch.]
#o. ! n. s. [basionnade, fr.]
1. the act of beating with a cudgel; the blow given with a
cudgel.
but this courtesy was worse than a ba'inad, to zelmane;
so with rageful eyes she bade him defend himself. sidnov.
and all those harsh and rugged founds -
of bastinados, cuts and wounds. hudibros.
2. it is sometimes taken for a turkish punishment of beating an
offender on the soles of his feet.
to bastina‘de. u v. a. [from the noun; taffonner, fr.] to
to e...} beat ; to treat with the bastinado.
nick seized the longer end of the cudgel, and with it began
to basiinado old lewis, who had sunk into a corner, waiting
the event of a squabble. a. o.
ba’s i is n.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 224</div><p class="text">b a t
b a t
basstion. m. s. shaftion, fr.] a huge mass of earth, usually
faced with sods, sometimes with brick, rarely with stone,
standing out from a rampart, of which it is a principal part, and
was anciently called a bulwark. - harris.
toward: but how ay there's the question ;
fierce the assault, unarm'd the bastion. prior.
bat. v. a. [bat, sax. this word seems to have given rise to a
great number of words in many languages; as, battre, fr. to
beat; baton, battle, beat, batty, and others. it probably fig-
nified a weapon that did execution by its weight, in opposition
to a sharp edge; whence whirlbat and brickbat...] a heavy stick
or club.
a handsome bat he held
on which he leaned, as one far in eld. spensor.
they were fried in arm chairs, and their bones broken with
bats. ak, will.
bat. m. s. [vespertilio, the etymology unknown.] an ani-
mal having the body of a mouse and the wings of a bird ;
not with feathers, but with a sort of skin which is extended.
it lays no eggs, but brings forth its young alive, and suckles
them. it never grows tame, feeds upon flies, inse&amp;ts, and
fatty substances, such as candles, oil, and cheese; and ap-
pears only in the summer evenings, when the weather is fine.
calmet.
when owls do cry,
on the bat's back l do fly. shakespeare.
but then grew reason dark; that fair star no more
could the fair forms of good and truth discern;
bats they became who eagles were before;
and this they got by their desire to learn. davies.
some animals are placed in the middle betwixt two kinds,
as bats, which have something of birds and beasts. locke.
where swallows in the winter season keep,
and how the drowsy bat and dormouse sleep. gay.
bat-fow ling. m. s. [from bat and fowl.) a particular manner
of bildcatching in the night-time, while they are at roost upon
perches, trees or hedges. they light torches or straw, and
then bea the bushes; upon which the birds flying to the flames,
are caught either with nets, or otherwise.
you would lift the moon out of her sphere, if she would
continue in it five weeks without changing.—we should so,
and then go a bat-fowling. shakespeare.
bodies lighted at night by fire, must have a brighter lustre
than by day; as sacking of cities, bat-fowling. peacham.
ba^table. adj. [from bate.] disputable.
batable ground seems to be the ground heretofore in ques-
tion, whether it belonged to england or scotland, lying be-
tween both kingdoms. cowel.
batch m. s. [from bake.]
r. the quantity of bread baked at a time.
the joiner puts the boards into ovens after the batch is
drawn, or lays them in a warm stable. mortimer's husbandry.
2. any quantity of any thing made at once, so as to have the
same qualities. -
except he were of the same meal and batch. b. johnson.
ba'tchelor. see bache lor.
bat e. m. s. [perhaps contracted from debate.] strife ; conten-
tion; as, a make bate. -
to bate. v. a. [contracted from abate.]
1. to lessen any thing; to retrench.
shall i bend low, and in a bondman's key,
with bated breath, and whisp'ring humbleness,
say this shakesp. merchant of venice.
nor envious at the sight will i forbear
my plenteous bowl, nor bate my plenteous cheer. dryden.
2. to sink the price.
when the landholder's rent falls, he must either bate the la-
bourer’s wages, or not employ, or not pay him. locke.
3. to lessen a demand.
bate me some, and i will pay you some, and, as most debtors
do, promise you infinitely. shakesp. henry iv.
4. to cut off; to take away.
bate but the last, and 'tis what i would say. dryd. sp. friar.
to bate. v. n.
1. to grow less.
bardolph, am not i fallen away vilely fince this last elec-
tion ? do i not late? do i not dwindle? why, my skin hangs
about me like an old lady's loose gown. shakesp. hen. iv.
2. to remit: with of before the thing.
abate thy speed, and i will hate of mine. dryden.
bate seems to have been once the preterite of bite, as shakespeare
uses biting faulchion; unless, in the following lines, it may be
rather deduced from beat.
yet there the steel staid not, but inly hate
deep in his flesh, and open'd wide a red flood gate. spenser.
ba’tefu l. a 'j. [from bate and full.] contentious.
he knew her haunt, and haunted in the same,
and taught his sheep her sheep in food to thwart;
which soon as it did bat ful question frame,
he might on knees confeis his guilty part. sidney.
batement. n.s. [from abatement.] diminution; a term only
used among artificers.
r
to abate, is to waste a piece of stuff; instead of asking how
much was cut off, carpenters ask what laterrent that piece of
{tuff had. 41-xon's mechanical exercises.
bath. m. s. [bag, saxon.]
1. a bath is either hot or cold, either of art or nature. artificial
baths have been in great esteem with the ancients, especially in
complaints to be relieved by revulsion, as inveterate headaches,
by opening the pores of the feet, and also in cutaneous cases.
but the modern practice has greatest recourse to the natural
baths; most of which abound with a mineral sulphur, as ap-
peas fion their turning silver and copper blackish. the cold
baths are the most convenient springs, or reservatories, of cold
water to wash in, which the ancients had in great citeem; and
the present age can produce abundance of noble cures per-
formed by them. &amp;uincy.
why may not the cold bath, into which they plunged them-
selves, have had some share in their cure? addison's speciator.
2. a state in which great outward heat is applied to the body,
for the mitigation of pain, or any other purpose.
in the height of this bath, when i was more than half stewed
in grease like a dutch dish, to be thrown into the thames
shaftspeare's merry hoves of windsor.
sleep, the birth of each day's life, fore labour's bath,
balm of hurt minds. shakespeare's macbeth.
3. in chymistry, it generally signifies a vessel of water, in which
another is placed that requires a softer heat than the naked fire.
balneum. //ariae is a mistake, for balneum maris, a sea or water
bath. a sand heat is sometimes called balneum sickum, or cine-
ret/???, &amp;aincy.
we see that the water of things distilled in water, which
they call the bath, differeth not much from the water of things
distilled by fire. bacon's natural history.
4. a fort of hebrew measure, containing the tenth part of an
homer, or seven ga!!ons and four pints, as a measure for things
liquid; and three pecks and three pints, as a measure for things
dry. calmet.
ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of
an homer shall yield an ephah. isaiah, v. o.
to bath.e. v. a. [basian, saxon.]
1. to wash, as in a bath.
others, on silver lakes and rivers, bathed
their downy breast. milton's parad's loft.
chancing to bathe himself in the river cydnus, through the
excessive coldness of these waters, he fell sick, near unto death,
for three days. south.
2. to supple or soften by the outward application of warm li-
quors.
bathe them and keep their bodies soluble the while by clys-
ters, and lenitive boluses. joseman's surgery.
i'll bathe your wounds in tears for my offence. dryden.
3. to wash anything. -
phoenician dido stood,
fresh from her wound, her bosom bath'd in blood. dryden.
mars could in mutual blood the centaurs bathe,
and jove himself give way to cinthia's wrath. dryden.
to bath e. v. n. to be in the water, or in any resemblance
of a bath.
except they meant to bathe in recking wounds, -
i cannot tell. shaksp. macbeth.
the delighted spirit
to bathe in firy floods, or to reside
in thrilling regions of thick ribbed ice.
the gallants dancing by the river side,
they bathe in summer, and in winter slide. j/a.''er.
but bathe, and, in imperial robes array'd, -
pay due devotions. pope's oosy.
ba't ing, or aba't ing, prep. [from bate, or abate. this word,
though a participle in itself, seems often used as a preposition.]
except.
the king, your brother, could not choose an advocate,
whom i would sooner hear on any subject,
bating that only one, his love, than you. rowe.
if we consider children, we have little reason to think, that
they bring many ideas with them, bating, perhaps, some faint
ideas of hunger and thirst. o locłe.
ba'tlet. n. s. [from bat.] a square piece of wood, with a
handle, used in beating linen when taken out of the buck.
i remember the kisling of her batset, and the cow's dugs that
her pretty chopt hands had milkcd. shakoshcare.
bato'on, n.s. [bylon, or baton, fr. formerly spelt losion.]
1. a staff or club.
we came close to the shore, and offered to land; but
straightways we saw divers of the people with basions in their
hands, as it were, forbidding us to land. bacon's new atlantis.
that does not make a man the worse,
although his shoulders with batoon
be claw’d and cudgell'd to some tune. hudibras.
2. a truncheon or marshal's staff; a badge of military honour.
batta ilous. adj. [from tattaille, fr.] having the appear-
ance of a battle; warlike ; with a military appearance.
he started up, and did himself prepare
in sun bright arms and battailous array.
shakespeare.
fairfax.
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 225</div><p class="text">b a t
b a u ,
o
**
o
|
the french came foremost battailous and bold. fairs.
a firy region, stretch'd
in battailous aspect, and nearer view
bristled with upright beams innumerable
of rigid spears and helmets throng’d. milton.
isatt ali a. m. s. [battaglia, ital.]
1. the order of battle.
next morning the king put his army into battalia. clarendon.
2. the main body of an army in array, distinguished from the
wings.
b.a.t.t.a. lios. m. s. [bataillon, fr.]
1. a division of an army , a troop; a body of forces. it is now
confined to the infantry, and the number is uncertain, but ge-
nerally from five to eight hundred men. some regiments consist
of one battalion, and others are divided into two, three, or more.
when sorrows come, they come not single spies,
put in battalions. shakespeare's hamlet.
in this battalion there were two officers, called thersites and
pandarus. tatler.
the pierc'd battalions disunited fall,
in heaps on heaps: one fate o'erwhelms them all. pope.
2. an army. this sense is not now in use.
six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
—why, our battalion trebles that account. shakspeare.
to batten. v. a. [a word of doubtful etymology.]
1. to fatten, or make fat ; to feed plenteously.
we drove afield
rati'ning our flock with the fresh dews of night.
2. to fertilize.
the meadows here, with batt'ning ooze enrich'd,
give spirit to the grass; three cubits high
the jointed herbage shoots. philips.
73 batt en. v. n. to grow fat; to live in indulgence.
follow your function, go and latten on cold bits. shakesp.
burnish’d and batt'ning on their food, to show
milton.
the diligence of careful herds below. drydon.
the lazy glutton safe at home will keep,
indulge his sloth, and batten on his sleep. dryden.
as at full length the pamper'd monarch lay,
batt'ning in ease, and slumbering life away. garth.
tway mice, full blythe and amicable,
batten beside erle robert’s table. prior.
while paddling ducks the standing lake desire,
or batt’ning hogs roll in the sinking mire. gay's pastorals.
batten. m. s. a word used only by workmen.
a batten is a scantling of wood, two, three or four inches
broad, seldom above one thick, and the length unlimited.
moxon.
to batter. v. a. [battre, to beat, fr.]
1. to beat; to beat down; to shatter; frequently used of walls
thrown down by artillery, or of the violence of engines of
was.
to appoint battering rams against the gates, to cast a mount,
and to build a fort. ezekiel.
these haughty words of hers
have batter'd me like roaring cannon shot,
and made me almost yield upon my knees. shakespeare.
britannia there, the fort in vain
had batter'd been with golden rain :
thunder itself had fail'd to pass. waller.
be then, the naval stores, the nation's care,
new ships to build, and batter'd to repair. dryden.
2. to wear with beating.
crowds to the castle mounted up the street,
batt'ring the pavement with their coursers feet. dryden.
if you have a silver saucepan for the kitchen use, let me ad-
vise you to batter it well; this will shew constant good house-
keeping. swift's directions to the cook.
3. applied to persons; to wear out with service.
the batter'd veteran strumpets here,
pretend at least to bring a modest ear. southern.
i am a poor old battered fellow, and i would willingly
end my days in peace. arbuthnot's hist, of john bull.
as the same dame, experienc'd in her trade, #
by names of toasts retails each batter'd jade. “ pope.
to batt fr. v. m. a word used only by workmen.
the side of a wall, or any timber, that bulges from its
bottom or foundation, is said to batter. aloxon.
batter. m. / [from to batter.] a mixture of several ingredi-
ents beaten together with some liquor; so called from its being
so much beaten.
one would have all things little, hence has try’d
turkey poults fresh from th’ egg in batter fry’d. king.
batterer. n.s.. [from batter.] he that batters.
battery. m. s. [from batter, or batterie, fr.]
1. the act of battering.
strong wars they make, and cruel battery bend,
'gainst fort of reason, it to overthrow. fairy queen.
earthly minds, like mud walls, resist the strongest batteries.
locke.
2. the instruments with which a town is battered, placed in
order for action ; a line of cannon.
vol. i. - o
where is best place to make our batt’ry next 2–
—i think at the north gate. shao-are's henry vs.
it plants this reasoning and that argument, this contequence
and that distinction, like so many intellectual hate, irs, till at
length it forces a way and passage into the obstinate inclosel
truth. south.
see, and revere th’ artillery of heav'n,
drawn by the gale, or by the tempest driven:
a dreadful fire the floating batt', ie: make,
o'eturn the mountain, and the forest shake. blackmore.
3. the frame, or raised work, upon which cannons are mounted.
4. [in law.) a violent striking of any man. inanastion against a
striker, one may be found guilty of the assault, yet acquitted
cf the battery. there may therefore be assault without bat-
tery; but battery always implies an assault. chambers.
why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about
the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his
action and battory p shakespeare.
sir, quo' the lawyer, not to flatterye,
you have as good and fair a battery,
as heart can wish, and need not shame
the proudest man alive to claim. hudibras.
batt is h. coff. [from lat.l resembling a bat.
- c
to be out late in a battish humour. gentleman instruct d.
battle. n.s. [bataille, fr.]
1. a fight; an encounter between opposite armies. we gene-
rally say a battle of many, and a combat of two.
the english army that diveded was
into two parts, is now conjoin’d in one ;
and means to give you battle presently.
the battle done, and they within our power,
she’ll never see his pardon, shałosorore.
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.
eccles.
so they joined battle, and the heathen being discomfited is d
into the plain. 1 4...coatees.
2. a body of forces, or division of an army.
the king divided his army into three battics; whereof the ,
vanguard only, with wings, came to fight. bacon.
3. the main body, as distinct from the van and rear. -
angus led the avant-guard, himself followed with the battle
a good distance behind, and after came the artier. hayward.
4. we say to join battle ; to give battle.
to battle. v. n. [butailor, fr.] to join battle ; to contend
in fight.
'tis ours by craft and by surprize to gain:
'tis yours to meet in arms, and battle in the plain. prior.
we receive accounts of ladies battling it on both sides. add.
l own, he hates an action base,
his virtues battling with his place. swift.
battle-array. m. s. [see battle and array.] array, ,
or order of battle. -
two parties of fine women, placed in the opposite side boxes,
seemed drawn up in battle-array one against another. addison.
battle-axe. m. s. a weapon used anciently, probably the
same with a bill.
certain tinners, as they were working, found spear heads,
battle-axes, and swords of copper, wrapped in linen clouts.
carew.
battle door. m.s.. [so called from door, taken for a flat board,
and battle, or /iriking.] an instrument with a handle and a
flat board, used in play to strike a ball, or shuttlecock.
play-things, which are above their skill, as tops, gigs, battle-
doors, and the like, which are to be used with labour, should
indeed be procured them. locke.
battlement. m. s. [generally supposed to be formed from
battle, as the parts from whence a building is defended against
assailants; perhaps only corrupted from batiment, fr.] a wasl
raised round the top of a building, with embrostres, or inter-
stices, to look through, to annoy an enemy.
and fixed his head upon our battlements.
shakespeare's macbeth.
thou shalt make a battlement for thy roof that thou bring
not blood upon thy house, if any man fall. deuteronomy.
through this we pass
up to the highest battlement, from whence
the trojans threw their darts.
their standard planted on the battlement,
despair and death among the soldiers sent.
no, i shan’t envy him, whoe'er he be,
that stands upon the battlements of state;
l'd rather be secure than great.
the weighty mallet deals resounding blows,
till the proud battlements her tow’rs inclose. gay.
batty. adj. [from bat.] belonging to a bat.
till o'er their brows death counterfeiting sleep,
with leaden legs and batty wings doth creep. shakspeare.
ba’v aroy. m. s. a kind of cloak, or surtout.
let the loop'd bavaroy the fop embrace,
or his deep cloke be spatter'd o'er with lace. gay.
ba’ubef. m. s. a word used in scotland, and the northern
counties, for a halfpenny.
s
shosheare.
-
denham.
d 'yon.
nor is.
tho’
**
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 226</div><p class="text">b. a. w.
b a y
r
tho' in the draw’rs of my japan bureau,
to lady gripeall i the caesars show,
*tis equal to her ladyship or me
a copper otho, or a scotch bautee. brams. man of tofte:
ba'vin. ii. s. [of uncertain derivation.]. a stick like those bound
up in faggots; a piece of waste wood. *
he rambled up and down
with shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,
soon kindled, and soon burnt. shakespeare's henry iv.
for moulded to the life in clouts,
th’ have pick’d from dunghils thereabouts,
he's mounted on a hazel bavin,
a crop'd malignant baker gave him. hudibrat.
the truncheons make billet, bavin, and coals. 44%rtimer.
to baulk. see balk.
ba‘w ble. n. s. [baubelium, in barbarous latin, signified a jewel,
or any thing valuable, but not necessary. omnia baubella sua
dedit othoni. howeden. probably from beau, fr.] a gew-
gaw; a trifling piece of finery; a thing of more show than
use; a trifle. it is in general, whether applied to persons or
things, a term of contempt. -
she haunts me in every place. i was on the sea bank with
some venetians, and thither comes the bauble, and falls me
thus about my neck. shakespeare's othello.
it is a paultry cap,
a custard coffin, a bawble, a filken pie. shakespeare.
if, in our contest, we do not interchange useful notions, we
shall traffick toys and bawbles. government of the tongue.
this shall be writ to fright the fry away,
who draw their little bawbses, when they play. dryden.
a lady's watch needs neither figures nor wheels;
'tis enough that 'tis loaded with bawbles and seals. prior.
our author then, to please you in your way,
presents you now a bawble of a play,
in gingling rhyme. granville.
a prince, the moment he is crown'd,
inherits every virtue round,
as emblems of the sovereign pow'r ;
like other bawbles of the tow'r, swift.
ba'w bill ng. adj. [from bawble.] trifling; contemptible: a
word not now in use, except in conversation.
a bawbling vessel was he captain of,
for shallow draught and bulk unprized;
with which such scathful grapple did he make,
with the most noble bottom of our fleet. shakespeare.
ba'wcock. m. s. [perhaps from beau, or baude, and cock ] a
familiar word, which seems to signify the same as fine fellow.
why, how now, my bawcock p how dost thou, chuck?
shakespeare's twelfth night.
bawd. m. s. [baude, old fr.] a procurer, or procuress; one
that introduces men and women to each other, for the promo-
tion of debauchery.
if your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves,
you need not to fear the bawds. shakespeare.
this commodity,
this bawd, this broker, this all changing word,
hath drawn him from his own determin’d aid. shakes.
our author calls colouring lena sororis, the lawd of her sister
design; she dresses her up, she paints her, she procures for the
design, and makes lovers for her. dryden.
to baw d. v. n. [from the noun..] to procure; to provide
gallants with strumpets.
leucippe is agent for the king's lust, and bawds, at the same
time, for the whole court. addison.
and in four months a batter'd harridan;
now nothing's left, but wither'd, pale, and shrunk,
to bawd for others, and go shares with punk. swift.
ba'wdily. adv. [from bawdy.] obscenely.
ba'w din ess. n.f. [from bawdy..] obsceneness.
ba'w drick. n. s. [see baldr1ck.] a belt.
fresh garlands too, the virgins temples crown'd ;
the youths gilt swords wore at their thighs, with silver
bawdricks bound. chapman's iliad.
ba'wdry. m. s. [contracted from bawdery, the practice of a
bawd.]
1. a wicked practice of procuring and bringing whores and
rogues together. ayliffe.
cheating and bawdry go together in the world: l'e/irange.
2. obscenity; unchaste language.
pr'ythee say on ; he's for a jig, or a tale of bawdry, or he
sleeps. shakespeare's hamlet.
i have no salt: no bawdry he doth mean:
for witty, in his language, is obscene. ben. johnson.
it is most certain, that barefaced bawdry is the poorest pre-
tence to wit imaginable. dryden.
ba'wpy, adj. [from bawd.] obscene; unchaste: generally
applied to language.
the bawdy wind that kisses all it meets,
is hush'd within the hollow mine of earth,
and will not hear’t. shakespeare's othello.
only they, -
that come to hear a merry bawdy play,
will be deceiv'd.
-
shakespeare,
not one poor bawdy jest shall dare appear;
for now the batter'd veteran strumpets here
pretend at least to bring a modest ear. souther n.
ba'w dy-house. m. s. a house where traffick is made by wic-
kedness and debauchery.
has the pope lately shut up the bawdy-houses, or does he con-
tinue to lay a tax upon sin dennis.
to bawl. v. n. [bal, lat.]
1. to hoof; to cry with great vehemence, whether for joy or
pain. a word always used in contempt.
they bawl for freedom in their senseless mood,
and till revolt, when truth would set them free. afilton.
to cry the cause up heretofore,
and bawl the bishops out of door. hudibras.
through the thick shades th’ eternal scribbler bawl,
and shakes the statues on their pedestals. * dryden.
from his lov’d home no lucre him can draw ;
the senate’s mad decrees he never saw ;
nor heard at lawling bars corrupted law. dryden.
loud menaces were heard, and foul disgrace
and bawling infamy, in language base,
till sense was lost in sound, and silence fled the place.
- dryden's fałi.s.
so on the tuneful margarita's tongue -
the list'ning nymphs, and ravish'd heroes hung;
but citts and fops the heav'n born musick blame, -
and baws, and hiss, and damn her into fame. smith.
i have a race of orderly elderly people, who can bawl when
| am deaf, and tread softly when i ain only giddy and would
eep. savoy.
2. to cry as a froward child. _f
a little child was bawling, and a woman chiding it. l'eor.
if they were never suffered to have what they cried for,
they would never, with bawling and peevishness, contend for
mastery. lockr.
my husband took him in, a dirty boy; it was the business
of the servants to attend him, the rogue did bawl and make such
a noise, a buthnot's hyłay of john bai.
to bawl. v. a. to proclaim as a crier.
it grieved me, when i saw labours which had cost so much,
batvled about by common hawkers. swift.
ba'w r el n s. a kind of hawk. die?.
b.a(ws in. m. s. a badger. dicf.
bay. adj. [badius, lat.]
a bay horse is what is inclining to a chesnut; and this co-
lour is various, either a light boy or a dark bay, according as it
is les, or more deep. there are also coloured horses, that are
called dappled bays. all bay hoises are commonly called
brown by the common people.
all bay horses have black manes, which 'distinguish them
from the sorrel, that have red or white manes. * -
there are light bays and gilded bays, which are somewhat of
a yellowish colour. the chesnutocy is that which comes
nearest to the colour of the chesnut. farrier's die?.
my lord, you gave good words the other day of a boy courser
i rode on. 'tis yours because you liked it. shakspeare.
poor tom ' proud of heart, to ride on a lay trotting horse
over four inch'd bridges. shakespears.
his colour'd grey,
, for beauty dappled, or the brightest bay. dryden.
bay. n.s. staye, dutch. j
1. an opening into the land, where the water is shut in on al
sides, except at the entrance. *
a reverend syracusan merchant,
who put unluckily into this bay. shakespeare.
we have also some works in the midst of the sea, and some
boys upon the shore for some works, wherein is required the
air and vapour of the sea. bacon.
hail, sacred solitude from this calm bay
i view the world's tempestuous sea. rossommen.
here in a royal bed the waters sleep,
when tir’d at sea, within this bay they creep. dryden.
some of you have bay. dryder.
2. a pond jead raised to keep in store of water for driving a mill.
bay. m. so [ahbai, fr. fignifies the last extremity; as, innocence
eft aux abboins. boileau. innocence is in the utmos' disors. it
is taken from abboi, the barking of a dog at hand, and thence
signified the condition of a stag when the hounds were almost
upon him.]
1. the state of any thing surrounded by enemies, and obliged
to face them by an impossibility of escape.
this ship for fifteen hours, sate like a flag among hounds
at the bay, and was sieged and faught with, in turn, by fifteen
great ships. bacon's war with spain.
fair liberty pursu'd and meant a prey
to lawless power, here turn'd, and stood at boy. denham.
nor flight was left, nor hopes to force his way;
embolden'd by despair, he stood at bay;
resolv'd on death, he dissipates his fears,
and bounds aloft against the pointed spears. dryden.
2. some writers, perhaps mistaking the meaning, have tised bay
as referred to the aflailant, for distance beyond which no
approach could be made.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
5
a!!,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 227</div><p class="text">b e
b e a
o
s
4.
o:
to
all, fir'd with noble emulation, strive;
and, with a storm of darts, to distance drive
the trojan chief; who held at bay, from far
on his vulcanian orb, sustain'd the war. dryden,
we have now, for ten years together, turned the whole
force and expence of the war, where the enemy was best able
to hold us at a lay. swift.
bay. m. s. in archite&amp;lure, a term used to signify the magni-
tude of a building ; as if a barn consists of a floor and two
heads, where they lay corn, they call it a barn of two bays.
these bays are from fourteen to twenty feet long, and floors,
from ten to twelve broad, and usually twenty feet long, which
is the breadth of the barn. builder's dic.
if this law hold in vienna ten years, i'll rent the fairest
house in it after threepence a bay. shakespeare.
there may be kept one thousand bushels in each bay, there
being sixteen bays, each eighteen icet long, about seventeen
wide, or three hundred square feet in each tay. mortimer.
bay tree. [laurus, lat..] the tree, as is generally thought,
which is translated laurel, and of which honorary garlands
were anciently made.
i have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading him-
self like a green bay tree. psalms.
bay. m. s. a poetical name for an honorary crown or garland,
bestowed as a prize for any kind of victory or excellence.
beneath his reign shall eusden wear the bays. pope.
to bay. v. n. [abbayer, fr.]
1. to bark as a dog at a thief, or at the game which he pursues.
and all the while she stood upon the ground,
the wakeful dogs did never cease to bay. fairy queen.
the hounds at nearer distance hoarsely hay’d;
the hunter close pursu'd the visionary maid; -
she rent the heav'n with loud laments, imploring aid.
dryden's fables.
2. [from bay, an inclosed place.] to encompass about; to shut
1i].
we are at the stake,
and bay’a about with many enemies. shakespeare.
to bay. v. a. to follow with barking; to bark at.
i was with hercules and cadmus once,
when in the wood of crete they bay'd the boar
with hounds of sparta.
if he should do so,
he leaves his back unarm’d, the french and welch
baying him at the heels. shakespeare.
bay sali. salt made of sea water, which receives its confist-
ence from the heat of the sun, and is so called from its brown
colour. by letting the sea water into square pits or basons,
its surface being struck and agitated by the rays of the sun, it
thickens at first imperceptibly, and becomes covered over
with a slight crust, which hardening by the continuance of
the heat, is wholly converted into salt. the water in this
condition is scalding hot, and the crystallization is perfected
in eight, ten, or at most fifteen days. chambers.
all eruptions of air, though small and slight, give sound,
which we call crackling, puffing, spitting, &amp;c, as in bay salt
and bay leaves cast into fire. bacon.
bay window. a window jutting outward, and therefore form-
ing a kind of bay or hollow in the room. -
it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes. shakesp.
bay yarn. a denomination sometimes used promiscuously with
woollen yarn. chambers.
ba'yard. m. s. [from bay.] a bay horse. blind bayard moves
the mill. philips.
bay on et. n.s.. [bayonette, fr.] a short sword or dagger fixed
at the end of a musket, by which the foot hold off the horse.
one of the black spots is long and slender, and resembles a
dagger or bayonet. j%odward.
bay ze. see ba 1ze.
bde llium. m. s. [33saxlow ; h9-12.] an aromatick gum
brought from the levant, used as a medicine, and a perfume.
baellium is mentioned both by the ancient naturalists and in
scripture; but it is doubtful whether any of these be the same
with the modern kind. chambers.
this bacilium is a tree of the bigness of an olive, whereof
, arabia hath great plenty, which yieldeth a certain gum, sweet
to smell to, but bitter in taste, called also bdellium. the he-
brews take the loadstone for baellium. raleigh.
to be. v. n. [this word is so remarkably irregular, that it is
necessary to set down many of its terminations.
present. i am, thou art, he is, we are, &amp;c.
shakespeare.
eon, eant, ir, anon, sax.
preter. i was, thou was or wert, he was, we were, &amp;c.
paes’, paene, par, fajron, sax.
the conjunctive mood. -
i be, thou bees', he be, we be, &amp;c. -
beo, birt, beo, beon, sax.]
1. to have some certain state, condition, quality, or accident;
as, the man is wise. - *****,
seventy senators died i ;
by their prescriptions, cicero being one.’ shakespeare.
he hath to-night been in unusual pleasure, shakespeare.
be what thou hop's to be, or what thou art,
resign to death, it is not worth enjoying. shakespeare.
be but about
to say she is a goodly lady, and
the justice of your hearts will add thereto,
'tis pity she is not honest, honourable. shakespeare.
let them shew the former things what they be, that we may
consider them. - isaiah.
therefore he sure,
thou, when the bridegroom with his feastful friends
passes to bliss at the mid hour of night,
haft gain'd, thy entrance, virgin wife and pure. milton.
it is not easy to discern what iuch men would beat. stillings.
to say a man has a clear idea of quantity, without knowing
how great it is, is to say, he has the clear idea of the number
of the sands, who knows not how many they be. locke.
2. it is the auxiliary verb by which the verb possive is formed.
the wine of life is drawn, and the meerlees
i left this vault to brag of. ..., shaoffear.
3. to exist; to have existence. ... *
the times have 13,
that when the brains were out the man would die. ms.t.
here cease, ye pow'rs, and let your vengeance end,
troy is no more, and can no more offend. dryden.
all th’ impossibilities which poets
count to extravagance of loose description, ,
shall sooner be. * rowe.
to be contents his natural desire;
he asks no angel's wing, nor feraph's fire. pope.
4. to have something by appointment or rule.
. . if all political power be derived only from adam, and he to
des end only to his successive heirs, by the ordinance of god,
and divine institution, this is a right anteccdent and paramount
to all government. locke.
5. l't be. do not meddle with ; leave untouched.
let be, said he, my prey. dryden.
beach. n. s. the shore; particularly that part that is dashed
by the waves; the strand.
the fishermen, that walk upon the beach, -
appear like mice. shakespeare's kir
deep to the rocks of hell, the gather'd beach.
they fastened, and the mole immense wrought on,
t
*
7
g lear.
over the foaming deep. * . milton.
they find the washed amber further out upon the beache, and
shores, where it has been longer exposed. jp'oodward.
beach ed. adj. [from beach.j exposed to the waves.
timon hath made his everlasting mansion
upon the beached verge of the salt flood;
which once a day, with his embossed froth,
o the turbulent surge shall cover. shakspeare.
be'achy. adj. [from beach..] having beaches. -
the beachy girdle of the ocean
too wide for neptune's hips. shakespeare.
be acon. m. s. [beacon, sax. from bech, a fignal, and becnan,
whence beckon, to make a signal j
1. something raised on an eminence, to be fired on the approach
of an enemy, to alarm the country.
his blazing eyes, like two bright shining shields,
did burn with wrath, and sparkled living fire;
as two broad beacons set in open fields,
send forth their flames. fairy queen.
modest doubt is called -
the beacon of the wise. shakespeare.
the king seemed to account of perkin as a may-game; yet
had given order for the watching of beacon; upon the coasts,
and erecting more where they stood too thin. ... orbacon.
no flaming beacons cast their blaze afar, * ..
the dreadful signal of invasive war. . . . . gay.
2. marks erected, or lights made in the night, to dire&amp; naviga-
tors in their courses, and warn them from rocks, shallows,
and sandbanks.
be ad. m. s. [beabe, prayer, saxon.] -
1. small globes or balls of glass or pearl, or other substance,
strung upon a thread, and used by the romanists to count their
prayers; from whence the phrase to tell beads, or to be at one's
beads, is to be at prayer. -
that aged dame, the lady of the place,
who all this while was busy at her beads.
thy voice i seein in every hymn to hear,
with ev'ry bead i drop too soft a tear. - pope.
2. little balls worn about the neck for ornament.
with scarfs and fans, and double charge of brav'ry,
with amber bracelets, beads, and all such knav'ry. shaksp.
3. any globular bodies.
thy spirit within thee hath been so at war,
that beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow. shakesp.
several yellow lumps of amber, almost like beads, with one
side flat, had fastened themselves to the bottom. boyle.
bead tree. [azedarach.] a plant.
be adle. n.s.. [bybel, sax, a messenger; bedeau, fr. bedel, sp.
bedelle, dutch.]
1. a messenger or servitor belonging to a court. cowel.
fairy queen.
2. a
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 228</div><p class="text">b e a
b e a
2. a petty officer in parishes, whose business it is to punish petty
offenders.
a dog’s obey'd in office.
thou raical beadle, hold thy bloody hand :
why dost thou lash that whore ? - shakshare.
they ought to be taken care of in this condition, either by
the beadle or the magistrate. speciator.
their common loves, a lewd abandon'd pack,
the badle's lash still flagrant on their back. prior.
be'adroll. n.s. [from lead and roll.] a catalogue of those
who are to be mentioned at prayers.
the king, for the better credit of his espials abroad, did
use to have them cursed by name amongst the beadroll of the
king's enemies. bacon's henry vii.
beads man. m. s. [from bead and man.] a man employed in
praying, generally in praying for another.
an holy hospital,
in which seven beadsmen, that had vowed all
their life to service of high heaven's king. fairy queen.
in thy danger,
commend thy grievance to my holy prayer; -
for i will be thy leadsman, valentine. shakesheare.
be’agle. m. s. [bigle, fr.] a small hound with which hares
are hunted.
the rest were various huntings.
the graceful goddess was array'd in green ;
about her feet were little beagles seen,
that watch'd with upward eyes the motions of their queen.
- dryden's fables.
to plains with well bred beagles we repair, -
and trace the mazes of the circling hare.
beak. m. s. [bec, fr. f i , welch )
1. the bill or horny mouth of a bird.
his royal bird
prunes the immortal wing, and cloys his beak,
as when his god is pleas'd. shakesp. cymbeline.
he saw the ravens with their horny beaks
food to elijah bringing. milton's par. regained.
the magpye, lighting on the stock,
stood chatt’ring with inceslant din,
and with her beak gave many a knock. swift.
2. a piece of brass like a beak, fixed at the end of the ancient
gallies, with which they pierced their enemies. it can now
be used only for the fore-part of a ship.
with boiling pitch another, near at hand,
from fricndly sweden brought, the seams instops;
which well laid o'er, the salt sea waves withstand,
and shakes them from the rising beak in drops. drydon.
3. a beak is a little shoe, at the toe about an inch long, turned
up and fastencil in upon the fore-part of the hoof. farrier's d.
4. anything ending in a point like a beak; as the spout of a
cup ; a prominence of land.
cuddenbeak, from a well advanced promontory, which en-
titled it leak, taketh a prospect of the river. carew's survey.
be a ked. a j. [rom leak.] having a beak; having the form
of a beak.
and question'd every gust of rugged winds,
that blows from off each beaked promontory. milton.
be/aker. m. s. [from beak..] a cup with a spout in the form of
a bird's beak.
and into pikes and musquetters,
pope.
stampt beakers, cups and porringers. hudilras.
with dulcet bev'rage this the leaker crown'd,
fair in the midst, with gilded cups around. pope's od.s.).
bfal. m. s. [bolla, ital.] a whelk or pimple.
to b.e.a.l. v. a. [from the noun..] to ripen ; to gather mat-
ter, or come to a head, as a fore does.
beam. m. s. [beam, sax, a tree.]
1. the main piece of timber that supports the house.
a beam is the largest piece of wood in a building, which al-
ways lies cross the building or the walls, serving to support
the principal rasters of the roof, and into which the feet of the
principal rafters are framed. no building has less than two
beams, one at each head. into these, the girders of the garret
floor are also framed; and if the building be of timber, the
teazel-tenons of the posts are framed. the proportions of
teams in or near london, are fixed by act of parliament. a
team fifteen feet long, must be seven inches on one side its
square, and five on the other; if it be sixteen feet long, cne
side must be cight inches, the other six; and so proportionable
to their lengths. builder's dic?.
the building of living creatures is like the building of a
timber house; the walls and other parts have columns and
beams, but the roof is tile, or lead, or stone. bacon.
he heav'd, with more than human force, to move
a weighty stone, the labour of a team,
and rais'd from thence he reach'd the neighb'ringleam. dryd.
2. any large and long piece of timber : a beam must have more
length than thickness, by which it is distinguished from a
block.
- but lycus, swifter,
springs to the walls and leaves his foes behind,
and snatches at the beam he first can find.
dryden's aemeid.
3. that part of a balance, at the ends of which the scales are
suspended.
poise the cause in justice' equal scales,
whose beam stands sure, whole rightful cause prevails. soo.
if the length of the fides in the balance, and the weights at
the ends be both equal, the boom will be in horizontal situa-
tion: but if either the weights alone be equal, or the distances
alone, the beam will accordingly decline. //i.o.o.
4. the horn of a stag.
and taught the woods to echo to the stream
his dreadful challenge, and his clashing beam. don.
5. the pole of a chariot; that piece of wood which runs be-
twcen the horses.
juturna heard, and seiz'd with mortal fear,
forc’d from the beam her brother's charioteer. drydon.
6. among weavers, a cylindrical piece of wood belonging to the
loom, on which the web is gradually rolled as it is wove.
the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam. 1 corz7.
7. beam of an anchor. the straight part or shank of an anchor,
to which the hooks are fastened.
8. beam compasses. a wooden or brass instrument, with sliding
sockets, to carry several shifting points, in order to draw cir-
cles with very long radii; and useful in large projections, for
drawing the furniture on wall dials. horror.
9 [runnebeam, sax. a ray of the sun.] the ray cflight emitted
from some luminous body, or received by the eye.
pile ten hills on the tarpeian rock,
that the precipitation might downstretch
below the beam of fight. shał, so. criosamar.
pleasing, yet cold, like cynthia's filver beam. dryden.
as heav'n's blest beam turns vinegar more sour. pose.
to beam. v. n. [from the noun..] to emit rays or beams.
each emanation of his fires
that beams on earth, each virtue he inspires.
beam tree. a species of wild service.
beamy. a j. [from beam.]
1. radiant; shining; emitting beams.
all-seeing sun'
hide, hide in shameful night, thy brary head.
2. having the weight or massiness of a beam.
his double-biting axe, and beamy spear;
each asking a gigantic force to rear.
3. having horns or antlers.
rouze from their descrt dens the bristled rage
of boars, and beamy stags in toils engage. dryden's jirgil.
bean. m. s. [faba, lat.]
the species are, 1. the common garden bran. 2. the
horse bean. there are several varieties of the garden beans,
differing either in colour or size. the principal sorts which
are cultivated in england, are the mazagan, the small lisbon,
the spanish, the tokay, the sandwich, and windsor beans.
the mazagan loan is brought from a settlement of the portu-
guese on the coast of africa, of the same name; and is by far
the best sort to plant for an early crop. aliller.
his allowance of oats and beans for his horse was greater
than his journey required. swift.
bean cafer. [fabago..] a plant.
bean iroffel. an herb.
73 bear. v. a. pret. i bore, or bare; part, pass bore, or born.
[bsonan, beran, sax. bairan, gothick. it is sounded as bare,
as the are in care and dure.
1. this is a word used with such latitude, that it is not easy
explained. -
we say to bear a burden, to bear sorrow or reproach, to
bear a name, to bear a grudge, to bear fruit, or to bear chil-
dren. the word bear is used in very different senses. jatts.
2. to carry as a burden.
they bear him upon the shoulder; they carry him and set
him in his place. isaiah.
and solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare
burdens. i king.
as an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young.
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her
wings. - deuteronomy.
we see some, who, we think, have born less of the burden,
poe.
• *
sr. o.
drydon's io.s.
rewarded above ourselves. decay of piety.
3. to convey or carry.
my message to the ghost of priam bear;
tell him a new achilles sent thee there.
dryden's afneid.
a guest like him, a trojan guest before, -
in shew of friendship, sought the spartan shore,
and ravish'd helen from her husband bare. garth.
4. to carry as a mark of authority.
i do commit into your hand
th’ unstained sword that you have us’d to bear. shakes?.
5. to carry as a mark of distinction.
he may not bear so fair and so noble an image of the divine
glory, as the universe in its full system. a file.
his pious brother, sure the best
who ever bore that name. dryden.
the sad spectators stiffen'd with their fears,
she sees, and sudden every limb she smears; . -
then each of savage beasts the figure bears. garth.
i
his
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 229</div><p class="text">b e a
b e a
s
*
his supreme spirit of mind will bear its best resemblance,
when it represents the supreme infinite. cheyne,
so we say, to bear arms in a coat.
6. to carry as in show.
look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
your hand, your tongue; look like the innocent flower,
but be the serpent under’t. shakespeare.
7. to carry as in trust.
he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put
therein. john.
8. to support; to keep from falling: frequently with up.
under colour of rooting out popery, the most effectual means
to bear up the state of religion may be removed, and so a way
be made either for paganism, or for barbarism to enter. hooker.
and samson took hold of the two middle pillars, upon which
the house stood, and on which it was borne up. judges.
a religious hope does not only bear up the mind under her
sufferings, but makes her rejoice in them. addison.
some power invisible supports his soul,
and bears it up in all its wonted greatness. addison.
9. to keep afloat; to keep from sinking: sometimes with up.
the waters encreased, and bare up the ark, and it was lifted
up above the earth. genesis.
io. to support with proportionate strength.
animals that use a great deal of labour and exercise, have
their solid parts more elastick and strong; they can bear, and
ought to have stronger food. arbuthnot on aliments.
11. to carry in the mind, as love, hate.
how did the open multitude reveal
the wond’rous love they bear him under hand daniel.
they bare great faith and obedience to the kings. bacon.
darah, the eldest, bears a generous mind,
but to implacable revenge inclin'd. dryden.
the coward bore the man immortal spite. dryden.
as for this gentleman, who is fond of her, she bareth him
an invincible hatred. swift.
that inviolable love i bear to the land of my nativity, pre-
valled upon me to engage in so bold an attempt. swift.
12. to endure, as pain, without sinking. -
it was not an enemy that reproached me, then i could have
borne it. psalms.
13. to suffer; to undergo, as punishment or misfortune.
i have borne chastisements, i will not offend any more. job.
that which was torn of beasts, i brought not unto thee, i
bare the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it. genosis.
14. to permit ; to suffer without resentment. -
- to reject all orders of the church which men have establish-
ed, is to think worse of the laws of men in this respect, than
either the judgment of wise men alloweth, or the law of god
itself will bear. hooker.
not the gods, nor angry jove will bear
thy lawless wand'ring walks in upper air. dryden.
15. to be capable of; to admit.
being the son of one earl of pembroke, and younger brother
to another, who liberally supplied his expence, beyond what
his annuity from his father could bear. clarendon.
give his thought either the same turn, if our tongue will
bear it, or, if not, vary but the dress. dryden.
do not charge your coins with more uses than they can bear.
it is the method of such as love any science, to discover all
others in it. addison on metals.
had he not been eager to find mistakes, he would not have
frained my works to such a sense as they will not bear.
atterbury.
in all criminal cases, the most favourable interpretation
should be put upon words that they possibly can bear. swift.
16. to produce, as fruit.
there be some plants that bear no flower, and yet bear fruit:
there be some that bear flowers, and no fruit: there be some
that bear neither flowers nor fruit. bacon.
they wing'd their flight aloft; then stooping low,
perch'd on the double tree that bears the golden bough.
- dryden.
say, shepherd say, in what glad soil appears
a wond’rous tree that sacred monarchs bears. pope.
17. to bring forth, as a child. -
the queen that bore thee,
oftener upon her knees than on her feet,
died every day she liv'd. *:::::::
ye know that my wife bare two sons. 'enosis.
what could the muse herself that orpheus bore,
the muse herself, for her enchanting son 2 milton.
the same æneas, whom fair venus bore
to fam’d anchises on th’ idean shore. dryden.
18. to give birth to ; to be the native place of.
- here dwelt the man divine whom samos bore,
but now self-banish’d from his native shore. dryden.
19. to possess, as power or honour.
when vice prevails, and impious men bear sway,
the post of honour is a private station. addison's cato.
20. to gain ; to win: commonly with away.
vol. i.
as it more concerns the turk than rhodes,
so may he with more facile question bear it;
for that it stands not in such warlike brace. shakespeare,
because the greek and latin have ever borne away the pre-
rogative from all other tongues, they shall serve as touchstones
to make our trials by. camden.
some think to bear it by speaking a great word, and being
peremptory; and go on, and take by admittance that which
they cannot make good. bacon.
21. to maintain; to keep up.
he finds the pleasure and credit of bearing a part in the con-
versation, and of hearing his reasons approved. locke.
22. to support anything good or bad.
i was carried on to observe, how they did bear their for-
tunes, and how they did employ their times. bacon.
23. to exhibit.
ye trojan flames, your testimony lear,
what i perform'd and what i suffer'd there. dryden.
24. to be answerable for.
if i bring him not unto thee, let me bear the blame, geness.
o more than madmen you yourselves shall bear
the guilt of blood and sacrilegious war. dryden.
25. to supply.
what have you under your arm somewhat that will bear
your charges in your pilgrimage 2 dryden.
26. to be the object of. this is unusual.
i'll be your father and your brother too;
let me but bear your love, i'll lear your cares. shaks).
27. to behave ; to act in any character.
some good instruclion give,
how i m. y lear me here. shakespeare.
hath he borne himself penitent in prison 2 shakesp.
28. to hold; to restrain: with off.
do you suppose the state of this realm to be now so feeble,
that it cannot bear off a greater blow than this hayward.
29. to impel ; to urge ; to push : with some particle noting the
direetion of the impulse; as, down, on, back, forward.
the residue were so disordered as they could not conveni-
ently fight or fly, and not only justled and bore down one an.
other, but, in their confused tumbling back, brake a part of
the avant guard. - sir j. hayward.
contention, like a horse -
full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose,
and bears down all before him. shakespeare:
their broken oars, and floating planks, withstan -
their passage, while they labour to the land;
and ebbing tides bear back upon th’ uncertain sand. dryd.
now with a noiseless gentle course
it keeps within the middle bed;
anon it lists aloft the head,
and bears down all before it with impetuous force. dryden:
truth is borne down, attestations neglected, the testimony
of sober persons despised. swift.
the hopes of enjoying the abbey lands would soon boar
down all considerations, and be an effectual incitement to their
perversion. swift.
30. to conduct; to manage.
my hope is
so to bear through, and out, the consulship,
as spite shall ne'er wound you, though it may me.
ben. johnson.
31. to press.
caesar doth bear me hard ; but he loves brutus. shakesp.
though he bear me hard,
i yet must do him right. ben. johnson.
these men bear hard upon the suspe&amp;ted party, pursue her
close through all her windings. addison.
32. to incite ; to animate.
but confidence then bore thee on ; secure
either to meet no danger, or to find
matter of glorious trial. milton.
33. to bear a body. a colour is said to bear a body in painting,
when it is capable of being ground so fine, and mixing with
the oil so entirely, as to seem only a very thick oil of the
same colour.
34. to bear date. to carry the mark of the time when any
thing was written.
35. to bear a price. to have a certain value.
36. to bear in hand. to amuse with false pretences; to deceive.
your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love
with such integrity, she did confess,
was as a scorpion to her fight. shakespeare.
his sickness, age, and impotence,
was falsely borne in hand. shakes care.
he repaired to bruges, desiring of the states of bruges, to
enter peaceably into their town, with a retinue fit for his estate;
and bearing them in hand, that he was to communicate with
them of matters of great importance, for their good. bacon.
it is no wonder, that some would bear the world in hand,
that the apostle's design and meaning is for presbytery, though
his words are for episcopacy. south.
t 37. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 230</div><p class="text">b e a
b e a
37. to bear off. . to carry away.
i will respect thee as a father, if
thou bear's my life off hence.
the sun views half the earth on either way,
shakspeare.
and here brings on, and there bears off the day. creech.
give but the word, we'll snatch this damsel up,
and bear her off. cato.
my soul grows desperate.
i'll bear her off. - a. philips.
38. to bear out. to support; to maintain; to defend.
i hope your warrant will bear out the deed. shakespeare.
i can once or twice a quarter bear out a knave against an ho-
nest man. shakespeare.
changes are never without danger, unless the prince be able
to bear out his actions by power. sir j. hayward.
quoth sidrophel, i do not doubt
to find friends that will bear me out. ihudibras.
company only can bear a man out in an ill thing. south.
i doubted whether that occasion could bear me out in the
confidence of giving your ladyship any farther trouble. temple.
to bea r. v. m.
1. to suffer pain.
stranger, cease thy care;
wise is the soul; but man is born to bear :
jove weighs affairs of earth in dubious scales,
and the good suffers while the bad prevails. pope.
they bore as heroes, but they felt as man. pope.
2. to be patient. o
i cannot, cannot lear; ’tis past, 'tis done; *
perish this impious, this detested son 1 dryden.
3. to be fruitful or prolifick.
a fruit tree hath been blown up almost by the roots, and set
up again, and the next year bear exceedingly. bacon.
betwixt two seasons comes th’ auspicious air,
this age to blossom, and the next to bear. dryden.
melons on beds of ice are taught to bear,
and, strangers to the sun, yet ripen here. granville.
- 4. to take effect; to succeed.
having pawned a full suit of cleaths, for a sum of money,
which, my operator assured me, was the last he should want
to bring all our matters to bear. guardian.
5. to act in any character.
instruct me
how i may formally in person bear,
like a true friar. shakeshcare.
6. to tend ; to be dire&amp;led to any point: with a particle to de-
termine the meaning ; as, up, away, onward.
the oily drops swimming on the spirit of wine, moved
restlessly to and fro, sometimes bearing up to one another, as
if all were to unite into one body, and then falling off, and
continuing to shift places. boyle.
never did men more joyfully obey,
or sooner understood the sign to fly :
with such alacrity they bore away. dryden.
whose navy like a stiff-stretched cord did shew,
till he bore in, and bent them into flight. dryden.
on this the hero fix’d an oak in fight,
the mark to guide the mariners aright:
to bear with this, the seamen stretch their oars,
then round the rock they steer and seek the former shores.
dryden.
in a convex mirrour, we view the figures and all other
things, which bear out with more life and strength than nature
itself. dryden.
7. to act as an impellent, opponent, or as a reciprocal power ;
generally with the particles upon or agains?.
we were encounter’d by a mighty rock,
which being violently borne upon,
our helpless ship was splitted in the midst. shakesp.
upon the tops of mountains, the air which bears against the
restagnant quicksilver, is less pressed. boyle.
the sides bearing one against the other, they could not lie so
close at the bottoms. burnet.
as a lion bounding in his way,
with force augmented bears agains, his prey,
sideling to seize. dryden.
because the operations to be performed by the teeth, require
a considerable strength in the instruments which move the
lower jaw, nature hath provided this with strong muscles, to
make it bear forcibly against the upper jaw. ray.
the weight of the body doth bear most upon the knee joints,
in raising itself up, and most upon the muscles of the thighs, in
coming down. //ilkins.
the waves of the sea bear violently and rapidly upon some
shores, the waters being pent up by the land. broome.
8. to act upon.
spinola, with his shot, did bear upon those within, who ap-
peared upon the walls. hayward.
9. to be situated with respect to other places; as, this moun-
tain bears west of the promontory.
10. to bear up. to stand firm without falling; not to sink; not
to faint or fail. -
so long as nature
will bear up with this exercise, so long
i daily vow to use it. shakoff care.
persons in distress may speak of themselves with dignity; it
shews a greatness of soul, that they bear up against the storms
of fortune. broome.
the consciousness of integrity, the sense of a life spent in
doing good, will enable a man to bear up under any change of
circumstances. atterbury.
when our commanders and soldiers were raw and unexpe-
rienced, we lost battles and towns; yet we bore up then, as
the french do now ; nor was there any thing decifive in their
successes. swift.
ii. to bear with. to endure an unpleasing thing.
they are content to bear with my absence and folly. sidney.
though i must be content to bear with those that say you
are reverend grave men; yet they lie deadly, that tell you,
you have good faces. shakespeare.
look you lay home to him;
tell him his pranks have been broad to bear with. shake?.
bear with me then, if lawful what i ask. milton.
bear. m. s. [bena, saxon, unsus, lat.]
i. a rough savage animal.
some have falsely reported, that bears bring their young
into the world shapeless, and that their dams lick them into
form. the dams go no longer than thirty days, and general-
ly produce five young ones. in the winter, they lie hid and
asleep, the male forty days, and the female four months; and .
so soundly for the first fourteen days, that blows will not wake
them. in the sleepy season, they are said to have no nourish-
ment but from licking their feet. this animal has naturally
an hideous look, but when enraged it is terrible; and, as
rough and stupid as it seems to be, it is capable of discipline;
it leaps, dances, and plays a thousand little tricks at the
sound of a trumpet. they abound in poland. in the remote
northern countries the species is white. calnet.
call hither to the stake my two brave bears,
bid salisbury and warwick come to me.
—are these thy bears p we’ll bait thy bears to death,
and manacle the bearward in their chains. shakespeare.
thou'dst shun a bear;
but if thy flight lay tow’rd the raging sea, -
thou'dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. shakespeare.
2. the name of two constellations, called the greater or lessor
lear; in the tail of the lossor bear, is the pole-star.
e’en then when troy was by the grecks o'erthrown,
the bear oppos'd to bright orion shone. creech.
bear-bind. m. s. a species of bindweed.
bear fly. m. s... [from bear and sy..] an inse&amp;. *
there be of flies, caterpillars, canker-flies, and bearsfies.
- bacon's natural history.
bear-garden. m. s. [from bear and garden.] -
1. a place in which bears are kept for sport.
hurrying me from the play-house, and the scenes there, to
the bear garden, to the apes, and asses, and tygers. stillingsleet.
2. any place of tumult or misrule.
i could not forbear going to a place of renown for the gal-
lantry of britons, namely to the bear-garden. spectator-
bear-garden. adj. a word used in familiar or low phrase for
rude or turbulent; as, a bear-garden fellow ; that is, a man rude
enough to be a proper frequenter of the bear-garden. bear-
garden sport, is used for gross inelegant entertainment.
bear’s breech. n. s. [acanthus...] the name of a plant.
the species are, 1. the smooth-leaved garden bear’s-breech.
2. the prickly bear’s-breech. 3. the middle bear’s-breech,
with short spines, &amp;c. the first is used in medicine, and is
supposed to be the mollis acanthus of virgil. the leaves of
this plant are cut upon the capitals of the corinthian pillars,
and were formerly in great esteem with the romans. miller.
be ar’s-ear, or auricula. [auricula us, lat.] the name
of a plant.
be ar’s-ear, or sanicle. [cortusa, lat.] a plant.
bear’s-foot. m. s. a species of hellebore.
bear's-wort. n.s. an herb.
beard. n.s.. [beanb, saxon.]
1. the hair that grows on the lips and chin.
ere on thy chin the springing beard began
to spread a doubtful down, and promise man. prior.
2. beard is used for the face; as, to do any thing to a man's
board, is to do it in defiance, or to his face.
rail'd at their covenant, and jeer'd
their rev'rend persons to my beard. hudibrar.
3. beard is used to mark age or virility ; as, he has a long beard,
means he is old.
this ancient ruffian, fir, whose life i have spared at suit of
his grey beard. soakspeare.
some thin remains of chastity appear'd,
ev’n under jove, but jove without a beard. dry sen.
would it not be insufferable for a professor to have his au-
thority, of forty years standing, confirmed by general tradi-
tion, and a reverend board overturned by an upstart novelist
locke.
4. sharp
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 231</div><p class="text">b e a
b e a
.
4. sharp prickles growing upon the ears of corn.
the ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
hath rotted ere its youth attain’d a beard. shakspeare.
a certain farmer complained, that the beard of his corn cut
the reapers and threshers fingers. l’estrange.
5. a barb on an arrow.
6. the beard or chuck of a horse, is that part which bears the
curb of the bridle. farrier's dic7.
to be ard. v. a. [from beard.]
1. to take or pluck by the beard, in contempt or anger.
no man so potent breathes upon the ground,
but i will beard him. shakspeare.
2. to oppose to the face; to set at open defiance.
he, whensoever he should swerve from duty, may be able
to beard him. spensor.
i have been bearded by boys. more.
the design of utterly extirpating monarchy and episcopacy,
the presbyterians alone begun, continued, and would have
ended, if they had not been bearded by that new party, with
whom they could not agree about dividing the spoil. swist.
be a r ded. adj. [from beard.]
1. having a beard.
think every bearded fellow, that's but yok'd,
may draw with you. shakes care.
old prophecies foretel our fall at hand,
when bearded men in floating castles land.
2. having sharp prickles, as corn.
as when a field
of ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends
her bearded grove of cars, which way the wind
sways them.
the fierce virago
flew o'er the field, nor hurt the bearded grain.
3. barbed or jagged.
thou shouldst have pull'd the secret from my breast,
torn out the bearded steel to give me rest. drydon.
be'ardless. adj. [from beard. j
1. without a beard.
there are some coins of cunobelin, king of essex and
middlesex, with a beardless image, inscribed cunobelin. camden.
2. youthful.
and, as young striplings whip the top for sport,
on the smooth pavement of an empty court,
the wooden engine flies and whirls about,
admir'd with clamours of the beardless rout.
be’arer. n.s.. [from to bear.]
i. a carrier of any thing, who conveys any thing from one place
or person to another.
he should the bearers put to sudden death,
dryden.
milton.
dryden.
dryden.
not shriving time allow'd. shakspeare.
forgive the bearer of unhappy news;
your alter'd father openly pursues
your ruin. dryden.
no gentleman sends a servant with a message, without en-
deavouring to put it into terms brought down to the capacity
of the bearer. swift.
2. one employed in carrying burthens.
and he set threcscore and ten thousand of them to be bearers
of burdens. 2 chronicles.
3. one who wears any thing.
o majesty |
when thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost fit
like a rich armour worn in heat of day,
that scalds with safety.
4. one who carries the body to the grave.
5. a tree that yields its produce.
this way of procuring autumnal roses, in some that are good
bearers, will succeed. boyle.
reprune apricots saving the young shoots, for the raw
bearers commonly perish. evelyn.
6. [in architecture.] a post or brick wall raised up between the
ends of a piece of timber, to shorten its bearing; or to pre-
vent its bearing with the whole weight at the ends only.
... [in heraldry.) a supporter.
£o. n. s. [from bear and herd; as, shepherd, from sheep.]
a man that tends bears.
he that is more than a youth, is not for me; and he that is
less than a man, i am not for him; therefore i will even take
sixpence in earncil of the bearherd, and lead his apes into hell.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
be'aring. m. s. [from bear.]
1. the site or place of anything with respect to something else.
but of this frame, the bearing and the ties,
the strong connections, nice dependencies,
gradations just, has thy pervading soul
look'd through or can a part contain the whole pope. -
2. gesture ; mien ; behaviour.
that is claudio; i know him by his bearing. shakesp.
3. [in architecture.] bearing of a piece of timber with carpen-
ters, is the space either between the two fixt extremes thereof,
or between one extreme and a post or wall, trimmed up be-
tween the ends, to shorten its bearing, builder's dict,
be'arward. m. s...[from lear and ward.] a keeper of bears.
we'll bait thy bears to death,
and manacle the bearward in their chains. shakespeare.
the bear is led after one manner, the multitude after an-
other ; the bearward leads but one brute, and the mountebank
leads a thousand. l'estrange.
beast. m. s. [heffe, fr. besia, lat.]
1. an animal, distinguished from birds, inse&amp;ts, fishes and man.
the man that once did sell the lion's skin,
while the beast lived, was kill'd with hunting him. shakes).
beasts of chase are the buck, the doe, the fox, the martern,
and the roe. beasis of the forest are the hart, the hind, the
hare, the boar, and the wolf. beasts of warren are the hare
and cony. cowel,
2. an irrational animal, opposed to man; as man and begs?.
i dare do all that may become a man;
who dares do more, is none.
what beast was’t then
that made you break this enterprize to me?
medea's charm were there, cicean feasts,
with bowls that turn'd enamour'd youths to hea's. dryd.
3. a brutal savage man; a man acting in any manner unworthy
of a reasonable creature.
to beast. v. a. a term at cards.
be’astings. see be estings.
beastliness. n.s.. [from beaffy.] brutality; pracice of any
kind contrary to the rules of humanity.
they held this land, and with their filthiness
polluted this same gentle soil long time;
that their own mother loath'd their bedsilings,
and 'gan abhor her brood's unkindly crime. fairy queen.
be’ast ly. adj. [from beast.] -
1. brutal; contrary to the nature and dignity of man. it is used
commonly as a term of reproach.
wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of men, or
remain a beast with beasts?—ay—a beasily ambition. shakesp.
you beasily knave, know you no reverence 2 k. lear.
with lewd, prophane, and beasily phrase,
to catch the world's loose laughter or vain gaze. b. johns.
it is charged upon the gentlemen of the army, that the
beasily vice of drinking to excess, hath been lately, from their
al...!eth.
example, restored among us. swift.
2. having the nature or form of beasts.
beasily divinities, and droves of gods: prior.
to beat. v. a. preter. beat. part, pass. beat, or beaten. [battre,
french.]
1. to strike; to knock; to lay blows upon.
so fight i, not as one that beateth the air.
he rav'd with all the madness of despair;
he roar’d, he beat his breast, he tore his hair,
2. to punish with stripes or blows.
they've chose a consul that will from them take
their liberties; make them of no more voice
than dogs, that are often beat for barking. shakoffear.
mistress ford, good heart, is beaten black and blue, that
you cannot see a white spot about her. shakespeare.
there is but one fault for which children should be beaten;
i corinthians.
dryden.
and that is obstinacy or rebellion. locke.
3. to strike an instrument of musick.
bid them come forth and hear,
or at their chamber door i'll beat the drum,
till it cry, sleep to death. shakes care.
4. to break; to bruise; to spread ; to comminute by blows.
the people gathered manna, and ground it in mills, or
beat it in a mortar, and baked it. 'umbers.
they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into
wires, to work it. exodus.
they save the laborious work of heating of hemp, by making
the axletree of the main wheel of their cern mills longer than
ordinary, and placing of pins in them, to raise large hammers
like those used for paper and fulling mills, with which they beat
most of their hemp, mortimer.
nestor furnished the gold, and he beat it into leaves, so
that he had occasion to use his anvil and hammer. broome.
5. to strike bushes or ground, or make a motion to rouze game.
it is strange how long some men will lie in wait to speak,
and how many other matters they will beat over to come near
it. bacon.
when from the cave thou risest with the day
to beat the woods, and rouze the bounding prey. prior.
together let us beat this ample field,
try what the open, what the covert yield. pope.
6. to thresh ; to drive the corn out of the husk.
she gleaned in the field, and beat out that she had gleaned.
ruth, ii. 17.
7. to mix things by long and frequent agitation.
by long beating the white of an egg, you may bring it into
white curds. boyle.
8. to batter with engines of war.
and he beat down the tower of penuel, and slew the men
of the city. judges, viii. 17.
9. to dash as water, or brush as wind.
beyond
t
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 232</div><p class="text">b e a
b e a
beyond this flood a frozen continent
lies dark and wild; beat with perpetual storms
of whirlwind and dire hail. milton.
with tempests beat, and to the winds a scorn. roscommon.
while winds and storms his lofty forehead beat,
the common fate of all that's high or great.
as when a lion in the midnight hours,
beat by rude blasts, and wet with wintry show'rs,
benham.
descends terrifick from the mountain's brow. pope.
io. to tread a path. -
while i this unexampled task essay,
pass awful gulfs, and beat my painful way,
celestial dove, divine assistance bring. blackmore.
11. to make a path by marking it with tracks.
he that will know the truth of things, must leave the com-
mon and beaten track. locke.
12. to conquer; to subdue ; to vanquish.
if hercules and lichas play at dice,
which is the better man the greater throw
may turn by fortune from the weaker hand:
so is alcides beaten by his page.
you souls of geese,
that bear the shapes of men, how have you run
from slaves that apes would beat p shakespeare.
live times, marcius,
i have fought with thee, so often hast thou beat me. -
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
i have discern’d the foe securely lie,
too proud to fear a beaten enemy. dryden.
the common people of lucca are firmly persuaded, that one
lucquese can beat five florentines. addison.
pyrrhus, king of epirus, joining his ships to those of the
syracusans, beat the carthaginians at sea. arbuthnot.
13. to harass ; to over-labour.
it is no point of wisdom for a man to beat his brains, and
fpend his spirits about things impossible. bakewill.
and as in prisons mean rogues beat
hemp, for the service of the great;
so whacum beat his dirty brains -
to advance his master's fame and gains. hudibras.
why any one should waste his time, and beat his head
about the latin grammar, who does not intend to be a critick.
- - locke.
14. to lay, or press, as standing corn by hard weather.
her own shall bless her;
her foes shake like a field of beaten corn,
and hang their heads with sorrow. shakespeare.
15. to depress; to crush by repeated opposition : usually with
the particle down.
albeit a pardon was proclaimed, touching any speech tend-
ing to treason, yet could not the boldness be beaten down either
with that severity, or with this lenity be abated. hayward.
our warriours propagating the french language, at the
same time they are beating down their power. addison.
such an unlook'd for storm of ills falls on me,
it beats down all my strength. addison.
16. to drive by violence; with a particle.
twice have i fally'd, and was twice beat back. dryden.
he that proceeds upon other principles in his inquiry, does
at least post himself in a party, which he will not quit, till
he be beaten out. locke.
he cannot beat it out of his head, but that it was a cardinal
who picked his pocket. addison.
the younger part of mankind might be beat off from the be-
lief of the most important points even of natural religion, by
the impudent jests of a profane wit. watts:
17. to move with fluttering agitation.
thrice have i leat the wing, and rid with night
about the world. dryden.
18. to heat down. to endeavour by treaty to lessen the price
demanded.
surveys rich moveables with curious eye,
boats down the price, and threatens still to buy. dryden.
she persuaded him to trust the renegado with the money he
had brought over for their ransom; as not questioning but he
would beat down the terms of it. addison.
19. to eat down. to sink or lessen the value.
- utury bra's down the price of land; for the employment
of inoney is chiefly either merchandizing or purchasing; and
usury way lays both. bacon.
20. to beat up. to attack suddenly; to alarm.
they lay in that quiet posture, without making the least
in presion upon the enemy, by beating up his quarters, which
might easily have been done. clarendon.
will fancies he should never have been the man he is, had
not he knocked down constables, and beat up a lewd woman's
quarters, when he was a young fellow. addison.
21, 19 leat the hos. to walk; to go on foot.
‘i a b.e.a.t. v. m. -
1. to move in a pulsatory manner.
i would gladly understand the formation of a soul, and fee
it beat the first conscious pulse. callier.
2. to dash as a flood or storm.
publick envy seemeth to beat chiefly upon ministers. bacon.
your brow, which does no fear of thunder know,
sees rowling tempests vainly beat below. dryden.
one sees many hollow spaces worn in the bottoms of the
rocks, as they are more or less able to resist the impressions of
the water that beats against them. addison.
3. to knock at a door.
the men of the city beset the house round about, and beat
at the door, and spake to the master of the house. a..."
4. to move with frequent repetitions of the same act or stroke.
no pulse shall keep
his nat'ral progress, but surcease to beat. shakespeare,
my temp'rate pulse does regularly beat;
feel, and be satisfy'd. dryden.
a man's heart beats, and the blood circulates, which it is
not in his power, by any thought or volition, to stop. locke.
5. to throb ; to be in agitation, as a fore swelling.
a turn or two i'll walk,
to still my beating mind.
6. to fluctuate; to be in agitation.
the tempest in my mind
doth from my senses take all feeling else,
save what beats there.
7. to try different ways ; to search : with about.
i am always beating alot in my thoughts for something that
shakespeare,
shakespeare.
may turn to the benefit of my dear countrymen. addison.
to find an honest man, i beat about,
and love him, court him, praise him in or out. pope.
8. to act upon with violence.
the sun beat upon the head of jonah, that he fainted, and
wished in himself to die. jonah.
9. to speak frequently; to repeat; to enforce by repetition:
with upon.
we are drawn on into a larger speech, by reason of their
so great earnestness, who beat more and more upon these last
alleged words. płocker.
how frequently and servently doth the scripture beat upon
this cause hakewill.
10. to beat up; as, to beat up for soldiers. the word up seems
redundant, but enforces the sense, the technical term being
to raise soldiers. o
beat. part. passive. [from the verb.
like a rich vessel beat by storms to shore,
't were madness should i venture out once more.
beat. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. stroke.
2. manner of striking.
albeit the base and treble strings of a viol be tuned to an
unison ; yet the former will still make a bigger sound than
drydon,
the latter, as making a broader beat upon the air. grew,
he with a careless beat,
struck out the mute creation at a heat. dryden.
3. manner of being struck; as, the beat of the pulse, or a
drum.
be’aten. particip. adj. [from to beat.]
what makes you, sir, so late abroad,
without a guide, and this no beaten road 2
beater. n.s.. [from leat.]
1. an instrument with which anything is comminuted or ming-
led.
beat all your mortar with a beater three or four times over,
before you use it; for thereby you incorporate the sand and
lime well together. moxon.
2. a person much given to blows.
the best schoolmaster of our time, was the greatest beater.
ascham's schoolma/i̇er.
#:::::::::: adj. [beatificus, low lat. from beatus, happy.]
beati'fick. § that which has the power of making happy,
or completing fruition; blissful. it is used only of id:#;
fruition after death. -
admiring the riches of heaven's pavement
than ought divine or holy else, enjoy’d
in vision beatifick. milton,
it is also their felicity to have no faith; for, enjoying the
beatifical vision in the fruition of the object of faith, they have
received the full evacuation of it. brown's pulgar errours.
we may contemplate upon the greatness and strangeness of
the beatifick vision; how a created eye should be so fortified, as
to bear all those glories that stream from the fountain of un-
created light. south.
beati'fically. adv. [from beatifical.] in such a manner as to
complete happiness. n.
beatifically to behold the face of god in the fulness of wis-
dom, righteousness and peace, is blesledness no way incident
unto the creatures beneath man. hakewill.
beatif ica’t 1o n. m. s. [from beatifick.] a term in the romish
church, distinguished from canonization. beatification is an
acknowledgment made by the pope, that the person beatified is
in heaven, and therefore may be reverenced as blessed: but is
not a concession of the honours due to saints, which are con-
ferred by canonization.
dryden.
2. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 233</div><p class="text">b e a
b e c
.
.
§
:
.
72 beatify. v. a. [beatifico, lat.] -
1. to make happy; to bless with the completion of celestial
enjoyment.
the use of spiritual conference is unimaginable and un-
speakable, especially if free and unrestrained, bearing an
image of that conversation which is among angels and beati-
fied saints. hammond.
we shall know him to be the fullest good, the nearest to us,
and the most certain; and, consequently, the most beatifying
of all others. brown.
i wish i had the wings of an angel, to have ascended into
paradise, and to have beheld the forms of those beatified spirits,
from which i might have copied my archangel. dryden.
2. to settle the character of any person by a publick acknow-
ledgment that he is received in heaven, though he is not in-
vested with the dignity of a saint.
over against this church stands an hospital, erected by a shoe-
maker, who has been beatified, though never sainted. addis.
be’ating. m. s. [from beat..] correction; punishment by blows.
playwright, convict of publick wrongs to men,
takes private beatings, and begins again. ben. johnson.
beatitude. n. s. [beatitudo, lat.]
1. blessedness; felicity; happiness: commonly used of the joys
of heaven.
the end of that government, and of all man's aims, is agreed
to be beatitude, that is, his being completely well. digby.
this is the image and little representation of heaven; it is
beatitude in picture. taylor.
he set out the felicity of his heaven, by the delights of
sense; slightly passing over the accomplishment of the soul,
and the beatitude of that part which earth and visibilities too
weakly affect. brown's wulgar errours.
2. a declaration of blessedness made by our saviour to particu-
lar virtues.
beau. m. s. [beau, fr. it is sounded like bo, and has often the
french plural beaux, sounded as boes...] a man of dress; a
man whose great care is to deck his person. -
what will not beaux attempt to please the fair? dryden.
the water nymphs are too unkind
to vill'roy; are the land nymphs so
and fly they all, at once combin’d
to shame a general, and a beau? prior.
you will become the delight of nine ladies in ten, and the
envy of ninety-nine beaux in a hundred. swift.
be'av er. m. s. [bievre, french ; fiber.]
1. an animal, otherwise named the casior, amphibious, and re-
markable for his art in building his habitation; of which many
wonderful accounts are delivered by travellers. his skin is
very valuable on account of the fur.
the beaver being hunted, biteth off his stones, knowing
that for them only his life is sought. hakewill.
they placed this invention upon the beaver, for the saga-
city and wisdom of that animal; indeed from its artifice in
building. brown's vulgar erreurs.
2. a hat of the best kind; so called from being made of the fur
of beaver. -
you fee a smart rhetorician turning his hat, moulding it in-
to different cocks, examining the lining and the button during
his harangue: a deaf man would think he was cheapening a
beaver, when he is talking of the fate of a nation. addison.
the broker here his spacious beaver wears,
upon his brow sit jealousies and cares. gay.
3. the part of a helmet that covers the face. [baviere, fr.]
his dreadful hideous head
close couched on the beaver, seem'd to throw,
from flaming mouth, bright sparkles fiery red.
big mars seems bankrupt in their beggar'd host,
and faintly through a rusty beaver peeps. shakespeare.
he was slain upon a course at tilt, the splinters of the staff
going in at his beaver. bacon.
be a v er ed. adj. [from leaver.] covered with a beaver;
wearing a beaver.
his leaver'd brow a birchen garland bears,
dropping with infant's blood, and mother's tears. pope.
be au'is h. adj. [from beau.] befitting a beau; foppish.
beauteous. adj. [from beauty..] fair; elegant in form ;
pleasing to the fight; beautiful. this word is chiefly poetical.
i can, petrucio, help thee to a wife,
spenser.
with wealth enough, and young, and beauteous. shakesp.
alas! not hoping to subdue,
i only to the flight aspir’d;
to keep the beauteous foe in view,
was all the glory i desir’d. prior.
beau"reously. adv. [from beauteous.] in a beauteous man-
ner; in a manner pleasing to the sight; beautifully.
look upon pleasures not upon that side that is next the sun,
or where they look beauteously; that is, as they come towards
you to be enjoyed. **. taylor.
beauteousness. m. s. [from beauteous.] the state or quality
of being beauteous; beauty.
from less virtue, and less beauteousness,
the gentiles fram'd them gods and goddesses.
vol. i. -
bonne,
beautiful. adj. [from beauty and fall.] fair; having the
qualities that constitute beauty.
he stole away and took by strong hand all the beautiful wo-
men in his time. raleigh.
the most important part of painting, is to know what is
most beautiful in nature, and most proper for that art; that
which is the most beautiful, is the most noble subject: so, in
poetry, tragedy is more beautiful than comedy, because the
persons are greater whom the poet instructs, and consequently
the instructions of more benefit to mankind. dryden.
beautiful looks are rul’d by fickle minds,
and summer seas are turn'd by sudden winds. prior.
beautifully. adv. [from beautiful..] in a beautiful manner.
no longer shall the boddice aptly lac'd,
from thy full bosom to thy slender waist,
that air and harmony of shape express,
fine by degrees, and beautifully less. prior.
beautifulness. n.s. [from beautiful..] the quality of being
beautiful; beauty; excellence of form.
to beautify. v. a. [from beauty..] to adorn; to embellish;
to deck ; to grace; to add beauty to.
never was sorrow more sweetly set forth, their faces seem-
ing rather to beautisy their sorrow, than their sorrow to cloud
the beauty of their faces. hayward.
sufficeth not that we are brought to rome,
to beautify thy triumphs and return,
captive to thee and to thy roman yoke shakespeare.
these were not created to beautify the earth alone, but for
the use of man and beast. raleigh.
how all conspire to grace
th’ extended earth, and beautiff her face. blackmore.
there is charity and justice; and the one serves to heighteri
and beautis; the other. atterbury.
torry. v. m. to grow beautiful ; to advance in
eauty.
it must be a prospe&amp;t pleasing to god himself, to see his
creation for ever beautifying in his eyes, and drawing nearer to
him, by greater degrees of resemblance. addison.
beauty... n.s.. [beaute, fr.]
i. that assemblage of graces, or proportion of parts, which
pleases the eye.
beauty consists of a certain composition of colour and figure,
“who delight in the beholder. - ocłt.
our beauty was the cause of that effect,
your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep.-
if i thought that, i tell thee, homicide,
these nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks. shakesp.
beauty is best in a body that hath rather dignity of presence
than beauty of aspect. the beautiful prove accomplished,
but not of great spirit, and study for the most part rather be-
haviour than virtue. bacon.
the best part of beauty is that which a picture cannot ex-
press. bacon.
of the beauty of the eye i shall say little, leaving that to
poets and orators: that it is a very pleasant and lovely object
to behold, if we consider the figure, colours, splendour of it,
is the least i can say. ray.
he view'd their twining branches with delight,
and prais'd the beauty of the pleasing sight. pope.
2. *f. grace, feature, or ornament.
he ancient pieces are beautiful, because they resemble the
beauties of nature; and nature will ever be beautiful, which
resembles those beauties of antiquity. dryden.
wherever you place a patch, you destroy a beauty. addison.
3. anything more eminently excellent than the rest of that
with which it is united.
this gave me an occasion of looking backward on some
beauties of my author in his former books. dryden.
with incredible pains have i endeavoured to copy the several
beauties of the ancient and modern historians. arbuthnot.
4. a beautiful person.
remember that pellean conquerour,
a youth, how all the beauties of the east
he slightly view'd, and slightly overpass'd.
what can thy ends, malicious beauty, be
can he, who kill'd thy brother, live for theef dryden.
to beauty. v. a. [from the noun..] to adorn; to beautify;
to embellish: not in use.
the harlot's cheek, beautied with plast’ring art,
is not more ugly to the thing that helps it,
than is my deed to your most painted word. , shakespeare.
beauty-spot. n.s.. [from beauty and spot.] a spot placed to
direet the eye to something else, or to heighten some beauty;
a foil ; a patch.
the filthiness of swine makes them the beauty-spot of the
animal creation. grew.
becafioco. n.s.. [becaffgo, span.] a bird like a nightingale,
feeding on figs and grapes; a fig-pecker. pinsda.
the robin-redbreast, till of late, had rest, - -
and children sacred held a martin's nest;
till becaficos sold so dev’lish dear,
to one that was, or would have been, a peer. pope.
u u ‘so
milton,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 234</div><p class="text">b e c
b e d
to beca’lm. v. a. [from calm.]
i. to still the elements. _
the moon shone clear on the becalmed flood. dryden.
2. to keep a ship from motion.
a man becamed at sea, out of fight of land, in a fair day,
may look on the sun, or sea, or ship, a whole hour, and per-
ceive no motion. locke.
3. to quiet the mind.
soft whisp'ring airs, and the larks mattin song,
then woo to muting, and becalin the mind -
perplex'd with irksome thoughts. philips.
banish his sorrows, and becalm his soul
with easy dreams. addison.
perhaps prosperity lecahn'd his breast;
perhaps the wind just shifted from the east. pope.
4. to becalm and to calm differ in this, that to calm is to stop
motion, and to becahn is to with-hold from motion.
beca’me. the preterite of become; which see.
beca'us e. coojume?, [from ly and carose.]
1. for this reason that; on this account that; for this cause that.
it makes the first part of an illative proposition either expressly
or by implication, and is answered by therefore ; as, i fled,
because i was afraid; which is the same with, because i was
afraid, therefore i fled.
how great soever the fins of any person are, christ died for
him, because he died for all; and he died for those fins, because
he died for all sins; only he must reform. hammond.
men do not so generally agree in the sense of these as of the
other, because the interests, and lusts, and passions of men,
are more concerned in the one than the other. 7 illotson.
2. it has, in some sort, the force of a proposition; but, because
it is compounded of a noun, has of after it.
infancy demands aliment, such as lengthens fibres without
breaking, because of the state of accretion. arbuthnot.
to becha nce. v. n. [from be and chance.] to befal; to hap-
pen to : a word proper, but now in little use.
my sons, god knows what has bechanced them. shakes.
all happiness bechance to thee at milan. shakespeare.
be'chicks. m. s. [3x3:22, of 3%, a cough..] medicines pro-
per for relieving coughs. dic?.
to beck. v. n. [beacn, sax. bec, fr. head..] to make a sign
with the head.
to beck. v. a. to call or guide, as by a motion of the head.
bell, book, and candle, shall not drive me back,
when gold and silver beck me to come on. shakosheare.
oh, this false soul of egypt, this gay charm,
whose eye beck'd forth my wars, and call'd them home.
shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
beck. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. a sign with the head; a nod.
hafle thee, nymph, and bring with thee
quips, and cranks, and wanton wiles,
nods, and becks, and wreathed smiles. milton.
2. a nod of command.
neither the lusty kind shewed any roughness, nor the easier
any idleness ; but still like a well obeyed master, whose beck
is enough for discipline. sidney.
then forthwith to him takes a chosen band
of spirits, likest to himself in guile,
to be at hand, and at his beck appear. 44 lion.
the menial fair, that round her wait,
at helen's beck prepare the room of state. pope.
to beckon. v. n. to make a sign without words.
alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made
his defence unto the people. 4:7;, xix. 33.
when he had raised my thoughts by those transporting airs,
he beckoned to me, and, by the waving of his hand, directed
me to approach. addison.
sudden you mount you beckon from the skies,
clouds interpose, waves roar, and winds arise. pope.
to be'ckos. v. a. [from lock, or beacn, sax. a sign.] to make
a sign to.
with her two crooked hands she signs did make,
and beckon'd him. fairy queen.
it beckons you to go away with it,
as if it some impartment did desire
to you alone. shakespeare.
with this his distant friends he beckons near,
provokes their duty, and prevents their fear. dryden.
to becli'p. v. a. [of be clyppan, sax.] to embrace. dic.
to beco'me. v. m. pret. i became; comp. pret. i have become.
[from by and come.]
1. to enter into some state or condition, by a change from some
other.
the lord god breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,
and man became a living soul. gen. ii. 7.
and unto the jews i became a jew, that i might gain the
jews, i cor. ix. 20.
a smaller pear, grasted upon a stock that beareth a greater
pear, will become great. bacon.
my voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not fear'd,
but stili rejoic'd ; how is it now become -
so dreadful to thee * - milton,
4.
so the least faults, if mix'd with fairest deed,
of future ill become the fatal seed. - prior.
2. to become of. to be the fate of; to be the end of; to be
the subsequent or final condition of. it is observable, that
this word is never, or very seldom, used but with what, ci.
ther indefinite or interrogative.
what is then become of so huge a multitude, as would have
overspread a great part of the continent? raleigh.
perplex'd with thoughts, what would become
of me, and all mankind. milton.
the first hints of the circulation of the blood were taken
from a common person's wondering what became of all the
blood which issued out of the heart. graunt.
//hat will become of me then f for when he is free, he will
infallibly accuse me. dryden.
what became of this thoughtful busy creature, when removed
from this world, has amazed the vulgar, and puzzled the
wife. rogers.
3. in the following passage, the phrase, where is he become 2 is
used for what is become of him?
i cannot joy, until i be resolved
where our right valiant father is become. shakes care.
to beco'me. v. a. [from be or ly, and cremen, sax. to please.]
i. applied to persons, to appear in a manner suitable to some.
thing.
if i become not a cart as well as another man, a plague on
my bringing up. shakespeare.
why would i be a queen? because my face
would wear the title with a better grace;
if i became it not, yet it would be
part of your duty then to flatter me. dryden.
2. applied to things, to be suitable to the person; to befit; to
be congruous to the appearance, or character, or circumstances,
in such a manner as to add grace; to be graceful.
she to her fire made humble reverence,
and bowed low, that her right well became,
and added grace unto her excellence. fairy quer.
i would i had some flowers of the spring that might
become your time of day; and your's, and your's,
that wear upon your virgin branches yet
your maidenheads growing. shosheart.
yet be sad, good brothers;
for, to speak truth, it very well becomes you. shakespears.
your dishonour
mangles true judgment, and bereaves the state
of that integrity which should become it. shakes care.
wicherly was of my opinion, or rather i of his: for it be-
comes me so to speak of so excellent a poet. dryden.
he utterly rejected their fables concerning their gods, as not
becoming good men, much less those which were worshipped
for gods. stillingfleet.
beco ming. particip. adj. [from become.] that which pleases
by an elegant propriety; graceful. it is sometimes used with
the particle of ; but generally without any government of the
following words.
of thee, kind boy, i ask no red and white
to make up my delight,
no odd becoming graces,
black eyes, or little know not what, in faces. suckling.
their discourses are such as belong to their age, their call-
ing, and their breeding; such as are becoming of them, and of
them only. dryden.
yet some becoming boldness i may use;
i’ve well deserv'd, nor will he now refuse. dryden.
make their pupils repeat the action, that they may correst
what is constrained in it, till it be perfocted into an habitual
and becoming easiness. locke.
beco'm in g. n. /. [from become.] ornament. a word not
now in use.
sir, forgive me,
since my becomings kill me, when they not
eye well to you. shakes care.
beco mingly. adv. [from becoming.] after a becoming or
proper manner.
beco ming ness. m. s. [from becoming. see 7% become.]
decency; elegant congruity; propriety.
nor is the majesty of the divine government greater in its
extent, than the becomingnes; hereof is in its manner and
form. grew.
bed. m. s. [beb, sax.]
1. something made to sleep on.
lying not erect, but hollow, which is in the making of the
bed; or with the legs gathered up, which is in the posture of
the body, is the more wholsome. lacon.
rigour now is gone to bed,
and advice with scrupulous head. az.'on.
those houses then were caves, or homely sheds,
with twining oziers fenc'd, and moss their beds. drydor.
2. lodging; the convenience of a place to sleep in.
on my knees i beg,
that you’ll vouchsafe me, rainent, bed, and food. shakop.
3. marriage. -
george, the eldest son of this second led, was, after the
death
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 235</div><p class="text">b e d
b e d
.
o
lo
death of his father, by the singular care and affe&amp;tion of his
mother, well brought up. clarendon.
4. bank of earth raised in a garden.
herbs will be tenderer and fairer, if you take them out of
beds, when they are newly come up, and remove them into
pots, with better earth. bacon.
5. the channel of a river, or any hollow.
so high as heav'd the tumid hills, so low
down sunk a hollow bottom, broad, and deep,
capacious bed of waters. milton.
the great magazine for all kinds of treasure is supposed to
be the bed of the tiber. we may be sure, when the romans
lay under the apprehensions of seeing their city sacked by a
barbarous enemy, that they would take care to bestow such of
their riches that way, as could best bear the water. addison.
6. the place where any thing is generated, or reposited.
see hoary albula’s infected tide
o'er the warm bed of smoaking sulphur glide.
7. a layer; a stratum ; a body spread over another.
i see no reason, but the surface of the land should be as re-
gular as that of the water, in the first production of it; and
the strata, or beds within, lie as even. burnet.
8. to bring to bed, to deliver of a child. it is often used
with the particle of; as, she was brought to bed of a daughter.
ten months after florimel happen'd to wed,
and was brought in a laudable manner to bed.
9. to make the bed.
used.
i keep his house, and i wash, wring, brew, bake, scour,
dress meat, and make the beds, and do all myself. shakespeare.
bed of a mortar. . [with gunners.] a solid piece of oak hol-
lowed in the middle, to receive the breech and half the trun-
inions. dic?.
bed of a great gun. that thick plank which lies immediately
under the piece, being, as it were, the body of the car-
addison.
prior.
to put the bed in order after it has been
riage. dic7.
to be d. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to go to bed with.
they have married me:
i'll to the tuscan wars, and never bed her. shakespeare.
2, to place in bed.
she was publickly contracted, stated as a bride, and so-
lemnly bedded; and, after she was laid, maximilian's ambas-
sadour put his leg, stript naked to the knee, between the
espousal sheets. bacon.
3. to make partaker of the bed.
there was a doubt ripped up, whether arthur was bedded
with his lady. bacon.
4. to sow, or plant in earth.
lay the turf with the grass side downward, upon which
lay some of your best mould to bed your quick in, and lay your
quick upon it. mortimer.
5. to lay in a place of rest, or security.
let coarse bold hands, from slimy nest,
the bedded fish in banks outwrest. donne.
a snake bedded himself under the threshold of a country-
house. l'estrange.
6. to lay in order; to stratify.
and as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
start up, and stand on end. shakespeare.
ta b.e.d. v. n. to cohabit.
if he be married, and bed with his wife, and afterwards re-
lapse, he may possibly fancy that she infected him. , wiseman.
to beda bble. v. a. [from dabble.] to wet; to besprinkle.
it is generally applied to persons, in a sense including incon-
wenlen ce.
never so weary, never so in woe,
bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briars,
i can no further crawl, no further go. shakespeare.
to beda gol e. v. a. [from daggle.] to bemire; to soil
cloaths, by letting them reach the dirt in walking.
to be da's h. v. a. [from dash..] to bemire by throwing dirt;
to bespatter ; to wet with throwing water.
when thy warlike father, like a child,
told the sad story of my father's death,
that all the standers-by had wet their cheeks,
like trees bedosh'd with rain. shakespeare.
to beda(wb. v. a. [from dawb.] to dawb over; to besmear;
to soil, with spreading any viscous body over it.
a piteous coarse, a bloody piteous coarse,
pale, pale as ashes, all bedawb'd in blood,
all in gore blood. shakespeare.
to beda’zzle. v. a. [from dazzle.] to make the fight dim
by too much lustre.
my mistaken eyes,
that have been so bedazzled by the sun,
that every thing i look on seemeth green. shakespeare.
bedcha'mber. m. j. [from bed and chamber.1 the chamber
appropriated to rest.
they were brought to the king, abiding them in his bed-
chamber, hayward,
he was now one of the bedchamber to the prince. claremon,
bepclo'aths. m. s. [from bed and coath. it has no singular.]
coverlets spread over a bed.
for he will be swine drunk, and, in his sleep, he does lit-
tle harm, save to his led souths about him. shakespeare.
bed der. n: s [from bed.] the nether stone of an oil-
be detter. s. mill.
bo'bping. m. s. [from b.d.] the materials of a bed; a bed.
there be no inns where meet bedding may be had ; so that
his mantle serves him then for a bed. speoser.
first, with affiduous care from winter keep,
well fother'd in the stalls, thy tender sheep;
then spread with straw the bodiing of thy fold,
with fern beneath, to fend the bitter cosi.
arcite return'd, and, as in honour ty'd,
his foe with bedding, and with food supply'd. dryden.
to bede'ck. v. a. [from deck ] to deck; to adorn ; to grace.
thou sham'st thy shape, thy love, thy wit, -&gt;
and usest none in that true use indeed,
which should bodeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit. shakes?.
female it seems,
that so bedeck'd, ornate, and gay,
dryden.
comes this way. milton.
with ornamental drops bedeck'd i stood,
and writ my victory with my enemy's blood. norrin.
now ceres, in her prime,
smiles fertile, and with ruddiest freight bed.cit. philips.
be dehouse. n. s. [from bebe, sax. a prayer, and house.] an
hospital or alms-house, where the poor people prayed for their
founders and benefactors.
be detter. see bedder.
to bed'ew. v. a. [from dew.] to moisten gently, as with the
fall of dew.
bedew her pasture's grass with english blood. shakespeare.
let all the tears that should bed-w my herse,
be drops of balm to sanetify thy head. shakes care.
the countess received a letter from him, whereunto all the
while she was writing her answer, she bedwed the paper with
her tears. j/otton.
what slender youth, bedev'd with liquid odours,
courts thee on roses, in some pleasant cave milton.
balm from a silver box distill'd around,
shall all led w the roots, and scent the sacred ground. dryd.
he said: and falling tears his face bedev. dryden.
bedf ellow. n.s.. [from bed and fellow.] one that lies is the
same bed,
he loves your people,
but tie him not to be their bedfellow.
misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows. shafts.
why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow,
being so troublesome a bedfellow p shakespeare.
a man would as soon choose him for his bedfellow as his
play-fellow. l'e/irange.
what charming bedfellows, and companions for life, men
choose out of such women? addison.
to bepi ght. o. a. [from dight.] to adorn; to dress; to
set off: an old word, now only used in humorous writings.
a maiden fine bedight he hapt to love;
the maiden fine bedight his love retains,
and for the village he forsakes the plains. gay.
to bedi’m. v. a. [foom dim.] to make dim; to obscure; ,
cloud; to darken.
i have bedimm'd
the noontide sun, call'd forth the mutinous winds,
and 'twixt the green sea and the azur'd vault
set roaring war. shakespeare.
to bedi'z en. v. a. [from dizen.] to dress out: a low word,
betxlam. m. s. [corrupted from bethlehem, the name of a re.
ligious house in london, converted afterwards into an hos.
pital for the mad and lunatick.]
1. a madhouse; a place appointed for the cure of lunacy.
2. a madman; a lunatick, and inhabitant of bedlam.
let's follow the old earl, and get the bedlam
to lead him where he would ; his roguish madness
allows itself to anything. shakespeare.
be dlam. adj. [from the noun..] belonging to a madhouse;
fit for a madhouse.
the country gives me proof and precedent
of bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
strike in their numb’d and mortify’d bare arms,
pins, wooden pricks. shakespeare.
be'dla mite. n.s.. [from bedlam.] an inhabitant of bedlam :
a madman.
if wild ambition in thy bosom reign,
alas! thou boast'st thy sober sense in vain;
in these poor bedlamites thyself survey,
thyself less innocently mad than they. fitzgerald.
be'dmaker. m. s. [from bed and make..] a person in the uni-
versities, whose office it is to make the beds, and clean the
chambers.
i was deeply in love with my ledmaker, upon which i was
rusticated for ever, spe:lator.
ba‘d-
shakespeare.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 236</div><p class="text">b e d
b e. e.
be’d mate. n.s.. [from bed and mate.] a bedfellow; one that
partakes of the same bed.
had i so good occasion to lie long
as you, prince paris, nought but heav'nly business
should rob my bedmate of my company. shakespeare.
be dmould ing. n. s. [from bed and mould..] a term
bedding one.} used by workmen, to signify those
members in the cornice, which are placed below the coronet.
builder’s dic?.
bedrost. n.s.. [from bed and post.] the post at the corner
of the bed, which supports the canopy.
i came the next day prepared, and placed her in a clear
light, her head leaning to a bedpost, another standing behind,
holding it steady. isiseman's surgery.
be'dpr esser. n.s.. [from bed and press.] a heavy lazy fellow.
this sanguine coward,this bedproffer,this horseback-breaker,
this huge hill of flesh. shakespeare.
to bedra gole. v. a. [from be and draggle.] to soil the
cloaths, by suffering them, in walking, to reach the dirt.
poor patty blount, no more be seen -
bedraggled in my walks so green. swift.
to be dre'nch. v. a. [from be and drench..] to drench 3 to
soak; to saturate with moisture.
far off from the mind of bolingbroke
it is, such crimson tempest should bedrench
the fresh green lap of fair king richard's land. , shakesp.
be'drid. adj. [from bed and ride.] confined to the bed by age
or sickness.
norway, uncle of young fontinbras,
who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
of this his nephew's purpose. shakespeare.
lies he not bedrid p and, again, does nothing,
but what he did being childish shakespeare.
now, as a myriad
of ants durst th' emperor's lov’d snake invade;
the crawling galleys, seagulls, finny chips,
might brave our pinnaces, our bedrid ships. donne.
hanging old men, who were bedrid, because they would
not discover where their money was. clarendon.
infirm persons, when they come to be so weak as to be fixed
to their beds, hold out many years; some have lain bedrid
twenty years. ray.
be'dr1's e. n.s.. [from bed and rite.] the privilege of the mar-
riage bed.
whose vows are, that no bedrite shall be paid
till hymen's torch be lighted. shakespeare.
to bedr op. v. a. [from be and drop.] to besprinkle; to
mark with spots or drops; to speckle.
not so thick swarm'd once the soil
bedrop'd with blood of gorgon. milton.
our plenteous streams a various race supply;
the silver eel in shining volumes roll’d,
the yellow carp, in scales bedrop'd with gold. pope.
be'dst aff. [bed and staff.] a wooden pin stuck anciently on
fides of the bedstead to hold the cloaths from slipping on either
side.
. hostess accommodate us with a beds off.
b. johnson's every man in his humour.
be'dstead. n.s.. [from bed and stead..] the frame on which
the bed is placed.
chimnies with scorn rejecting smoke;
stools, tables, chairs, and bed/leads broke. swift.
be'dstraw. m. s. [from bed and straw.] the straw laid un-
der a bed to make it soft.
fleas breed principally of straw or mats, where there hath
been a little moisture; or the chamber or bedstraw kept close,
and not aired. bacon.
bedswe'rye r. m. s. [from bed and swerve..] one that is false
to the bed; one that ranges or swerves from one bed to an-
other.
she's a bedswerver, even as bad as those,
that vulgars give the bold'st titles to. shakespeare.
be'dtime. n.s.. [from bed and time.] the hour of rest; sleep-
ing time.
what masks, what dances shall we have,
to wear away this long age of three hours,
between our after-supper and bedtime? shakespeare.
after evening repasts, till bedtime, their thoughts will be
best taken up in the easy grounds of religion. milton.
the scouring drunkard, if he does not fight
before his bedtime, takes no rest that night. dryden.
to bedu'n g. v. a. [from be and dung.] to cover, or manure
with dung.
to be du'st. v. a. [from be and dust.] to sprinkle with dust.
be'dw ard. adv. [from bed and ward.] toward bed.
- in heart
as merry, as when our nuptial day was done,
and tapers burnt to bedward. shakespeare.
to bedw a'rf. v. a. [from be and dwarf.] to make little; to
hinder in growth; to stunt.
'tis shrinking, not close weaving, that hath thus
in mind and body both bedwarfed us. danne.
be'dwork, n, s. [from led and work.] work done in bed;
work performed without toil of the hands.
the still and mental parts,
that do contrive how many hands shall strike,
when fulness call them on, and know, by measure
of their observant toil, the enemy's weight;
why this hath not a finger's dignity,
they call this bedwork, mapp'ry, closet war. shakespeare.
bee. m. s. [beo, saxon.]
1. the animal that makes honey, remarkable for its industry
and art.
so work the honey bees,
creatures that, by a ruling nature, teach
the art of order to a peopled kingdom. shakes care:
from the moorish camp,
there has been heard a distant humming noise,
like bees disturb’d, and arming in their hives. dryden.
a company of poor insects, whereof some are bees, delight-
ed with flowers, and their sweetness; others beetles, delight-
ed with other viands. locke.
2. an industrious and careful person. this signification is only
used in familiar language.
bee-eater. n.s.. [from bee and eat..] a bird that feeds upon
bees.
bee-flow er. n.s.. [from bee and flower.] a species of fool-
stones. miller.
bee-garden. n.s.. [from bee and garden.] a place to set hives
of bees in.
a convenient and necessary place ought to be made choice
of, for your apiary, or bee-garden. amortimer.
bee-hive. m. s. [from bee and hive.] the case, or box, in which
bees are kept.
bee-master. m. s. [from bee and mysler.] one that keeps
bees.
they that are bee-masters, and have not care enough of
them, must not expect to reap any considerable advantage by
them. 41ortimer.
beech. n.s.. [bece, or boc, saxon; fagus.]
there is but one species of this tree at present known, ex-
cept two varieties, with striped leaves. it will grow to a con-
siderable stature, though the soil be stony and barren ; as also,
upon the declivities of mountains. the shade of this tree is
very injurious to plants, but is believed to be very salubrious
to human bodies. the timber is of great use to turners and
joiners. the mast is very good to fatten swine and deer. amiller.
black was the forest, thick with berth it stood. dryden.
nor is that sprightly wildness in their notes,
which clear and vigorous, warbles from the beech. thors.
beech en. adj. [bucene, sax.] consisting of the wood of the
beech ; belonging to the beech.
with diligence he'll serve us when we dine,
and in plain beechen vessels fill our wine. dryden.
beef. n.s.. [baeus, french.]
1. the flesh of black cattle prepared for food.
what say you to a piece of beef and mustard? shakes.
the fat of roasted beef falling on birds, will baste them.
swift.
2. an ox, bull, or cow, considered as fit for food. in this sense
it has the plural beeves ; the singular is seldom found.
a pound of man's flesh
is not so estimable or profitable,
as flesh of muttons, beeves, or goats. shakes?care.
alcinous slew twelve sheep, eight white-tooth'd swine,
two crook-haunch'd beeves. chapman.
there was not any captain, but had credit for more vic-
tuals than we spent there; and yet they had of me fifty
beeves among them. sir waiter raleigh.
on hides of beeves, before the palace gate,
sad spoils of luxury ! the suitors sate. pope.
beef, adj. [from the substantive..] consisting of the flesh of
black cattle.
if you are employed in marketing, do not accept of a treat
of a beef stake, and a pot of ale, from the butcher. swift.
beef-eater. m. s. [from beef and eat, because the commons is
bef when on waiting. mr. steevens derives it thus: beef-
eater may come from beaufetier, one who attends at the side-
board, which was anciently placed in a beaufot. the business
of the leof eaters was, and perhaps is still, to attend the king
at meals.] a yeoman of the guard.
beef-witted, adj. [from beef and wit..] dull; stupid; heavy-
headed.
beef-witted lord. shakespeare.
be'e mol. n.s., this word i have found only in the example,
and know nothing of the etymology, unless it be a corruption
of bymodule, from by and modulus, a note; that is, a note out
of the regular order.
there be intervenient in the rise of eight, in tones, two bec-
mols, or half notes; so as, if you divide the tones equally, the
eight is but seven whole and equal notes. bacon.
been. [bedn, saxon.] the participle preterite of to be.
enough that virtue fill'd the space between,
prov’d by the ends of being to have been. pope.
2. beer,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 237</div><p class="text">b e f
b e f
bee r. m. s. s." welch.] liquor made of malt and hops. it
i.distinguished from ale; either by being older or smaller.
here's a pot of good double beer, neighbour; drink. shakesp.
try clarifying with almonds in new beer. bacon.
flow, welsted flow, like thine inspirer, beer;
tho' stale, not ripe; tho' thin, yet never clear;
so sweetly mawkish, and so smoothly dull;
heady, not strong; and foaming, tho’ not full. pope.
b e^est ings. see biestings.
... m. s. [beta, lat.] the name of a plant.
boi. %: are ; 1. the common white beet. 2. the
common green beet. 3. the common red beet. 4. the
turnep-rooted red beet. , 5. the great red beet. 6. the yel-
low lect. 7. the swiss or chard beet. a filler.
i: e, etle. m. s. [bytel, saxon.]
1. an inscct distinguished by having hard cases or sheaths, under
which he folds his wings.
'i'hey are as shards, and he their beetle. shakespeare.
the poor beetle, that we tread upon,
in corporal suff'rance finds a pang as great,
as when a giant dies. shakespeare.
others come sharp of sight, and too provident for that
which concerned their own interest; but as blind as beetles in
foreseeing this great and common danger.
knolles's history of the turks.
a grott there was with hoary moss o'ergrown,
the clasping ivies up the ruins creep,
and there the bat and drousy beetle sleep. garth.
the butterflies and beetles are such numerous tribes, that i
believe, in our own native country alone, the species of each
kind may amount to one hundred and fifty, or more. ray.
2. a heavy mallet, or wooden hammer, with which wedges
are driven, and pavements rammed.
if i do, fillip we with a three man beetle. shakespeare.
when, by the help of wedges and beetles, an image is cleft
out of the trunk of some well grown tree; yet, after all the
skill of artificers to set forth such a divine block, it cannot,
one moment, secure itself from being eaten by worms, or de-
filed by birds, or cut in pieces by axes. stillingfleet.
to be etl e. v. m. [from the noun..] to jut out; to hang
ovc i.
what if it tempt you tow'rd the flood, my lord
or to the dreadful summit of the cliff,
that beetles o'er his base into the sea. shakespeare.
or where the hawk,
high in the beetling cliff, his airy builds. thomson.
beet lebr o'w ed. adj. [from beetle and brow.] having promi-
nent brows.
enquire for the beetle-brow'd critic, &amp;c. swift.
beetleh eaded. adj. [from beetle and head..] loggerheaded;
wooden headed; having a head stupid, like the head of a
wooden beetle.
a whoreson, beetleheaded flap-ear'd knave. shakesp.
be’etlestock, n. s. [from beetle and stock.] the handle of a
beetle.
be etrave.
be’et radish. } a plant.
beeves. n. s. [the plural of beef.] black cattle; oxen.
one way, a band select from forage drives
a herd of beeves, fair oxen, and fair kine,
from a fat meadow ground. milton.
others make good the paucity of their breed with the length
and duration of their days; whereof there want not examples
in animals uniparous, first, in bisulcous or cloven-hoofed, as
camels; and beeves, whereof there is above a million annually
slain in england. brown's vulgar errours.
beeves, at his touch, at once to jelly turn,
and the huge boar is shrunk into an urn. pope.
to bef all. v. n. [from fall. it befell, it hath befallen.]
1. to happen to ; used generally of ill.
let me know
*
the worst that may befall me in this case. shakespeare.
other doubt possesses me, lest harm
befall thee, sever'd from me. milton.
this venerable person, who probably heard our saviour's
prophecy of the destruction of jerusalem, drew his congrega-
tion out of those unparalleled calamities, which befell his
countrymen. * -- . addison.
this disgrace has befallen them, not because they deserved
it, but because the people love new faces. addison.
2. to happen to, as good or neutral.
bion asked an envious man, that was very sad, what harm
had befallen unto him, or what good had befallen unto ano-
ther man bacon.
no man can certainly conclude god's love or hatred to
any person, from what befalls him in this world. tillotson,
3. to happen; to come to pass.
but since th' affairs of men are still uncertain,
let's reason with the worst that may befall. shakespeare.
i have reveal’d,
this discord which befell, and was in heav'n
among th' angelick pow'rs.
milton.
vol. i. i
4. it is used sometimes with to before the person to whom any
thing happens: this is rare.
some great mischief hath befalon
to that meek man. paradio lyo.
5. to befall of. to become of; to be the state or condition of :
a phrase little used.
do me the favour to dilate at full,
whath hath befalon of them, and thee, till now. soot.o.
to befit. v. a. [from te and fit..] to suit; to be suitable
to ; to become.
blind is his love, and best beft; the dark. shakosheare.
out of my sight, thou serpent –that name best
boots thee, with him leagu'd : thyself as false. par. left.
i will bring you where she sits;
glad in splendour, as befits
her deity. parad's loft.
thou, what befits the new lord mayor,
art anxiously inquisitive to know. dryden.
to befo'ol. v. a. [from be and fool.] to infatuate; to fool;
to deprive of understanding ; to lead into errour.
men befool themselves infinitely, when, by venting a few
sighs, they will needs persuade themselves that they have r-
pented. south.
jeroboam thought policy the best piety, though in nothing
more befooled; the nature of fin being not only to defile, but
to infatuate. south,
before. prep. [biponan, sax.]
1. farther onward in place.
their common practice was to look no further before them
than the next line; whence it will follow that they can drive
to no certain point. dryden.
2. in the front of ; not behind.
who shall go
before them in a cloud, and pillar of fire:
by day a cloud, by night a pillar of fire,
to guide them in their journey, and remove
behind them, while the obdurate king pursues.
3. in the presence of; noting authority or conquest.
great queen of gathering clouds,
see we fall before thee!
prostrate we adore thee.
the alps and pyrenean sink before him.
4. in the presence of, noting respect.
we see that blushing, and the casting down of the eyes
both, are more when we come before many. bacon.
they represent our poet betwixt a farmer and a courtier,
when he drest himself in his best habit, to appear before his
milton.
dryden.
aldison.
patron. dryden.
5. in fight of.
before the eyes of both our armies here,
let us not wrangle. shakespeare.
6. under the cognizance of; noting jurisdiction.
if a suit be begun before an archdeacon, the ordinary may
license the suit to an higher court.
ayliffe.
7. in the power of ; noting the right of choice.
the world was all before them, where to chuse
their place of rest, and providence their guide. milton.
give us this evening; thou hast morn and night,
and all the year before thee, for delight. . dryden.
he hath put us in the hands of our own counsel. life and
death, prosperity and destruction, are before us. tillotson.
8. by the impulse of something behind.
her part, poor soul seeming as burdened
with lesser weight, but not with lesser woe,
was carried with more speed before the wind.
hurried by fate, he cries, and borne before
a furious wind, we leave the faithful shore.
9. preceding in time.
particular advantages it has before all the books which have
appeared before it in this kind. * dryden.
io. in preference to.
we should but presume to determine which should be the
fittest, till we see he hath chosen some one, which one we may
then o; say to be the fittest, because he hath taken it be-
fore the rest. hooker.
we think poverty to be infinitely defireable before the tor-
ments of covetousness. taylor.
11. prior to; nearer to any thing: as, the eldest son is before
the younger in succession.
12. superiour to ; as, he is before his competitors both in right
and power.
befo're. adv.
1. sooner than ; earlier in time.
heav'nly born,
before the hills appear'd, or fountain flow'd,
shakespeare.
d ryde?!,
thou with eternal wisdom didst converse. amilton.
before two months their orb with light adorn,
if heav'n allow me life, i will return. dryden.
2. in time past.
such a plenteous crop they bore
of purest and well winnow'd grain,
as britain never knew before. dryden.
-
x x 3. in
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 238</div><p class="text">b e g
b e g
3. in sometime ately past. -
i shall resume somewhat which hath been $osore said, touch-
ing the question beforegoing. hale.
4. previously to ; in order to. . -
before this elaborate treatise can become of use to my
country, two points are necessary. swift.
5. to this time; higherto.
the peaceful cities of th’ ausonian shore,
lull'd in her ease, and undisturb’d before, -
are all on fire. pryden.
6. already.
you tell me, mother, what i knew before,
the phrygian fleet is landed on the shore. dryden.
7. farther onward in place.
thou'rt so far before,
the swistest wing of recompence is slow
to overtake thce.
be fo'rehan d. adv. [from before and hand.]
1. in a state of anticipation, or preoccupation; sometimes with
the particle with.
quoth hudibras, i am beforehand
shakspeare.
in that already, with your command. hudibras.
your soul has been beforehand with your body,
and drunk so deep a draught of promis'd bliss,
she slumbers o'er the cup. - dryden.
i have not room for many refle&amp;tions; the last cited author
has been beforehand with me, in its proper moral. addison.
2. previously; by way of preparation, or preliminary.
his profession is to deliver precepts necessary to eloquent
seech ; yet so, that they which receive them, may be taught
beforehand the skill of speaking. hooker.
when the lawyers brought extravagant bills, sir roger used
to bargain beforehand, to cut off a quarter of a yard in any
part of the bill. a buhnot.
3. antecedently; aforetimes.
it would be resisted by such as had beforehand resisted the
general proofs of the gospel. atterbury.
4. in a state of accumulation, or so as that more has been re-
ceived than expended.
stranger's house is at this time rich, and much beforehand;
for it hath laid up revenue these thirty-seven years. bacon.
5. at first ; before any thing is done.
what is a man's contending with insuperable difficulties,
but the rolling of sisyphus's stone up the hill, which is soon
b.forehand to return upon him again : l'estrange.
befo'retime. adv. [from before and time.] formerly; of old
time.
beforetime in israel, when a man went to enquire of god,
thus he spake. 1 samuel.
to be fo'rtune. v. n. [from be and fortune.] to happen too;
to betide.
i give consent to go along with you ;
recking as little what betideth me,
as much i wish all good befortune you. shakespeare.
to be foul. v. a. [from be and foul..] to make foul; to soil;
to dirt.
to befr1'end. v. a. [from be and fiend.) to favour ; to be
kind to ; to countenance; to shew friendship to ; to benefit.
if it will please caesar
to be so good to caesar, as to hear me,
i shall beseech him to befriend himself. shakespeare.
now if your plots be ripe, you are befriended
with opportunity. denham.
see them embarked,
and tell me if the winds and seas befriend them. addison.
be thou the first true merit to befriend;
his praise is lost, who stays till all commend. pope.
brother-servants must befriend one another. swift.
to befr1 ng e. v. a. [from be and fringe.] to decorate, as
with fringes.
when i flatter, let my dirty leaves
cloath spice, line trunks, or, flutt'ring in a row,
befringe the rails of bedlam and soho. pope.
7% beg. v. m. [beggeren, germ.] to live upon alms; to live
by asking relief of others.
i talk of dreams,
which are the children of an idle brain,
bogot of nothing but vain phantasy. shakespeare.
who hath bigotten me these, seeing i have lost my children,
and am desolate isaiah.
'twas he the noble claudian race begat. dryan.
love is begot by fancy, bred -
by ignorance, by expectation fed.
2. to produce, as effects.
if to have done the thing you gave in charge,
baget you happiness, be happy then ;
for it is done. sho speare.
my whole intention was to beget, in the minds of men, mag-
granville,
nificent sentiments of god and his works. cloyne,
3. to produce, as accidents.
is it a time for story, when each minute
begeis a thousand dangers ? denham.
4. it is sometimes used with on, or upon, before the mother.
bogot upon
his mother martha by his father john. speciator.
begetter. m. s. [from beget.] he that procreates, or begets;
the father.
for what their prowess gain'd, the law declares
is to themselves alone, and to their heirs:
no share of that goes back to the bogetter,
but if the son fights well, and plunders better— drydon.
mien continue the race of mankind, commonly without the
intention, and often against the consent and will of the boget-
fer. lace.
beggar. m. s. [from bog. it is more properly written begger,
but the common orthography is retained, because the deriva.
tives all preserve the a..]
1. one who lives upon alms; one who has nothing but what is
given him.
he raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the
beggar from the dunghill, to set them among princes. saw.
we see the whole equipage of a boggar so drawn by homer,
as even to retain a nobleness and dignity. broom.e.
2. one who supplicates for any thing; a petitioner; for which,
boggar is a harsh and contemptuous term.
what subjects will precarious kings regard?
a beggar speaks too softly to be heard.
. one who assumes what he does not prove.
these shameful beggars of principles, who give this preca-
rious account of the original of things, asiume to themselves
to be men of reason. till too.
to be"go ar. v. a. (from the noun.] -
1. to reduce to beggary; to impoverish.
whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave,
and beggar'd your's for ever. shakespeare.
they shall spoil the clothiers wool, and boggar the present.
spinners. graunt.
drydon.
the miser -
with heav'n, for twopence, cheaply wipes his score,
lifts up his eyes, and hastes to beggar more.
2. to deprive.
necessity, of matter beggar'd,
will nothing stick our persons to arraign
in ear and ear.
3. to exhaust.
gay,
shakspeare.
for her person,
it beggar'd all description; she did lie
in her pavilion, cloth of gold, of tissue,
o'er-picturing venus. shakespeare,
be’o garlin ess. n. s. [from beggary.] the state of being beg-
garly ; meanness; poverty.
be'ggarly. adj. [from beggar..] mean; poor; indigent; in
the condition of a beggar : used both of persons and things.
i ever will, though he do shake me off
to beggarly divorcement, love him dearly. shakespeare.
a beggarly account of empty boxes. shakespeare.
who, that beheld such a bankrupt beggar'y follow as crom-
well entering the parliament house, with a thread bare torn
cloak, and greasy hat, could have suspected, that he should,
by the murder of one king, and the banishment of another,
i cannot dig; to big i am ashamed. luke. ascend the throne * south,
to beg. v. a. the next town has the reputation of being extremely poor
1. to ask; to seek by petition. and beggarly. adaison,
he went to pilate, and begged the body. matthew. corusodes, by extreme parsimony, saved thirty-four pounds
see how they beg an alms of flattery. 1 oung. out of a bogga, ly fellowship. swift. ... .
be"go arly. adv.[from eggar..] meanly; despically; indigently. * .
touching god himself, hath he revealed, that it is his de--":
light to dwell boggarly 2 and that he taketh no pleasure to boo'. "
worshipped, saving only in poor cottages hook or of
be ggary. m. s. [from boggar. j indigence; poverty in the uß.
most degree.
on he brought me into so bare a house, that it was be
picture of sniferable happiness and rich beggary. sony. “
while i am a beggar, i will lail,
and say there is no fin, but to be rich :
and being rich, my virtue then shall be,
to say there is no vice, but boggary,
2. to take any thing for granted, without evidence or
roof.
p we have not begged any principles or suppositions, for the
proof of this; but taking that common ground, which both
moses and al antiquity present. burnet.
to bege’t. v. s. begot, or bogat ; i have begotten, or begat.
[be;excan, saxon, to obtain. see to get.j
1.to generate; to procreate ; to become the father of, as chil-
dren. -
but first come the hours, which we begot
in jove's sweet paradise, of day and night,
which do the seasons of the year allot.
spenser. skałesore.
we
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 239</div><p class="text">b e g
b e h
.
o ; :
‘we must become not only poor for the present, but re-
duced, by further mortgages, to a state of beggary for endless
years to come. swift.
to is e.g. n. v. n. i bigan, or boun; i have begun. [beginnan,
sax. from be, or by to, and 5 insan, fian, or 3an, to go.]
1. to en'er upon founctiving new : applied to persons.
p. on every day to repent ; not that thou shoulds at all de-
scrit; but all that is past ought to seem little to thee, seeing
it is so in itself. yogin the next day v, ith the same zeal, fear,
and humility, as if thou had it never begun before. taylor.
2. to commence any ac, on or slate; to do the first a?, or first
part of an act; to make the first step fiom not doing to
doing.
they began at the ancient men which were before the
house. ezekiel.
by peace we will begin. shakes care.
l’ll sing of heroes and of kings;
begin my muse. cowley.
of these no more you hear him speak;
he now begins upon the greek:
these rang'd and show'd, shall, in their turns,
remain obscure as in their urns. prior.
leginning from the rural gods, his hand
was lib’ral to the pow'rs of high command.
rapt into future times, the bard bogun,
a virgin shall conceive. pope.
3. to enter upon existence ; as, the world began; the practice
began.
i am as free as nature first made man
ere the base laws of servitude began,
dryden.
when wild in woods the noble savage ran. dryden.
4. to have its original.
and thus the hard and stubborn race of man,
from animated rock and flint began. blackmore.
from nimrod first the savage chace began;
a mighty hunter, and his game was man. pope.
5. to take rise ; to commence.
judgment must begin at the house of god. i peter.
the song begun from jove. dryden.
ali began,
all ends in love of god, and love of man. pope.
6. to come into act,
now and then a sigh he stole,
and tears began to flow. dryden.
to beg 1'n. v. a.
1. to do the first act of any thing ; to pass from not doing to
doing, by the first act.
ye nymphs of solyma, begin the song. pope.
they have been awaked, by these awful scenes, to begin
religion; and, afterwards, their virtue has improved itself
into more refined principles, by divine grace. watts.
2. to trace from any thing as the first ground.
the apostle begins our knowledge in the creatures, which
leads us to the knowledge of god. locke.
3. to begin with. to enter upon ; to fall to work upon.
a lesson which requires so much time to learn, had need be
early begun with. government of the tongue.
begi'nner. m. s. [from begin.]
1. he that gives the first cause, or original, to anything.
thus heaping crime on crime, and grief on grief,
to loss of love adjoining loss of friend,
i meant to purge both with a third mischief,
and, in my woc's beginner, it to end. spensor.
socrates maketh ignatius, the bishop of antioch, the first
beginner thereof, even under the apostles themselves. hooker.
2. an unexperienced attempter; one in his rudiments ; a young
ractitioner.
palladius, behaving himself nothing like a beginner, brought
the honour to the iberian side. sidney.
they arc, to beginners, an easy and familiar introduction;
a mighty augmentation of all virtue and knowledge in such
as are entered before. hooker.
i have taken a list of several hundred words in a sermon of
a new beginner, which not one healer could possibly under-
stand. swist.
begi’nning. m. s. [from begin.]
1. the first original or cause.
wherever we place the beginning of motion, whether from
the head or the heart, the body moves and acts by a consent of
all its parts. swift,
2. the entrance into ag, or being. -
in the beginning god created the heavens and the earth.
- “. geness.
3. the state in which anything first is.
youth, what man's age is like to be, doth show ;
we may our end by our beginning know. denham.
4. the rudiments, or first grounds or materials.
. by viewing nature, nature's handmaid, art,
makes mighty things from small beginnings grow :
thus fishes first to shipping did impart,
their tail the rudder, and their head the prow. dryden.
the understanding is passive ; and whether or not it will
have these beginnings, and materials of knowledge, is not in
its own power. locke.
5. the first part of any thing. -
the causes and designs of an aetion, are the beginning; the
effects of these causes, and the difficulties that are met with in
the execution of these designs, are the middle; and the unra-
velling and resolution of these difficulties, are the end. broome.
to begi rp. v. a. i begirt, or begirded; i have begirt. [from
be and gird.]
1. to bind with a girdle.
2. to surround ; to encircle; to encompass.
begird th' almighty throne,
besecching, or besieging. milton.
or should she confident,
as sitting queen adorn'd on beauty's throne,
descend, with all her winning charms begirt,
to enamour. milicn.
at home surrounded by a servile croud,
prompt to abuse, and in detraction loud:
abroad begint with men, and swords, and spears;
his very state acknowledging his fears.
3. to shut in with a fiege ; to beleaguer; to block up.
it was so closely begirt before the king's march into the
west, that the counsel humbly desired his majesty, that he
would relieve it. clarendon.
to begi'rt. v. a. [this is, i think, only a corruption of be-
gird; perhaps by the printer.] to begird. see begird.
and, lentulus, begint you pompey's house,
to seize his sons alive; for they are they
must make our peace with him. ben. johnson.
be'glerbeg. n.s. [turkish.] the chief governour of a
province among the turks.
to be gna w. v. a. [from be and graw.] to bite; to eat a-
wo to corrode ; to nibble.
is horse is stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with
the bots, waid in the back, and shoulder shotten. shakesp.
the worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul.
shakespeare's richard iii.
bego'ne. interjec. [only a coalition of the words be gone..] go
away; hence ; haste away.
begone / the goddess cries, with stern disdain ;
begone / nor dare the hallow'd stream to stain.
prior.
she fled, for ever banish'd from the train. addison.
#: en. } the participle passive of the verb beget.
remember that thou wast begot cf them. ecclus.
the first he met, antiphates the brave,
but base begotten on a theban slave. dryden.
to begrease. v. a. [from be and grease.] to soil or dawb
with unctuous or fat matter.
to begr1'me. v. a. [from be and grime. see grime and
gr1 m.] to soil with dirt deep impressed; to soil in such a
manner that the natural hue cannot easily be recovered.
her name that was as fresh
as dian's visage, is now begrim’d, and black
as my own face.
to begui'l e. v. a. [from be and guile.]
1. to impose upon ; to delude; to cheat.
this i say, left any man should beguile you with enticing
words. colossians.
the serpent me beguil'd, and i did eat 44ilton.
whosoever sees a man, who would have beguiled, and im-
posed upon him, by making him believe a lie, he may truly
say, that is the man who would have ruined me. south.
2. to deceive ; to evade.
is wretchedness depriv'd that benefit,
to end itself by death 'tis yet some comfort,
when misery could beguile the tyrant's rage,
shakespeare.
and frustrate his proud will. shakespeare.
3. to deceive pleasingly; to amuse.
sweet, leave me here awhile ;
my spirits grow dull, and fain i would beguile
the tedious day with sleep. shakespeare.
with these sometimes she doth her time beguile;
these do by fits her phantasy possess. sir j. davies.
begu'n. the participle passive of begin.
but thou bright morning star, thou rising sun,
which in these latter times hast brought to light
those mysteries, that, since the world begun,
lay hid in darkness and eternal night. sir 7. davier.
be ha'lf. n.s.. [this word skinner derives from hij, and in-
terprets it, for my half; as, for my part. it seems to me rather
corrupted from behoof, profit; the pronunciation degenerating
easily to behase; which, in imitation of other words to sound-
ed, was written, by those who knew not the etymology, to-
half.]
1. favour; cause favoured ; we say in behalf, but for the sake.
he was in confidence with those who designed the destruc-
tion of strafford ; against whom he had contracted some pre-
judice, in the behalf of his nation, - -
were but my heart as naked to thy view,
marcus would see it bleed in his behalf.
carention.
alison.
never<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
o
8
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 240</div><p class="text">b e h
b e h
never was any nation blessed with more frequent interposi-
tions of divine providence in its behalf. atterbury.
2. vindication; support. - - -
he might, in his presence, defy all arcadian knights, in the
behalf of his mistress's beauty. sidney.
lest the fiend,
or in behalf of man, or to invade -
vacant possession, some new trouble raise. milton.
others believe, that by the two fortunes, were meant pro-
sperity or affliction ; and produce, in their behalf, an ancient
monument. addison on italy.
to be ha’ve. v. a. [from be and have.]
1. to carry; to conduct: used almost always with the recipro-
cal pronoun.
we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you. thos.
manifest signs came from heaven, unto those that behaved
themselves manfully. 2 maccabees.
to their wills wedded, to their errours slaves,
no man, like them, they think, himself behaves. denham.
we so live, and so act, as if we were secure of the final issue
and event of things, however we may behave ourselves. atterb.
2. it seems formerly to have had the sense of, to govern; to
subdue ; to discipline : but this is not now used.
but who his limbs with labours, and his mind
behaves with cares, cannot so easy miss. fairy queen.
with such sober and unnoted passion,
he did behave his anger ere 'twas spent,
as if he had but prov’d an argument. shakespeare.
to be ha’v e. v. n. to act; to conduct one's self. it is taken
either in a good or a bad sense; as, he behaved well or ill.
beha’v iou r. m. s. [from behave.]
1. manner of behaving one's self, whether good or bad ; man-
ners; carriage with respect to propriety.
mopsa, curious in any thing but her own good behaviour,
followed zelmane. sidney.
2. external appearance, with respect to grace.
he marked, in dora's dancing, good grace and handsome
behaviour. sidney.
. gesture; manner of action, adapted to particular occasions.
well witnessing the most submissive behaviour, that a thralled
heart could express, sidney.
when we make profession of our faith, we stand; when
we acknowledge our sins, or seek unto god for favour, we fall
down; because the gesture of constancy becometh us best in
the one, in the other the behaviour of humility. hooker.
one man sees how much another man is a fool, when he
dedicates his behaviour to love. shakespeare.
and he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned him-
self mad in their hands. 1 samuel.
4. elegance of manners; gracefulness.
the beautiful prove accomplished, but not of great spirit;
and study, for the most part, rather behaviour than virtue.
bacon.
he who adviseth the philosopher, altogether devoted to the
muses, sometimes to offer sacrifice to the altars of the graces,
thought knowledge imperfect without behaviour. j/otton.
5. conduct; general practice; course of life.
to him, who hath a prospect of the state that attends men
after this life, depending on their behaviour here, the mea-
sures of good and evil are changed. locke.
6. to be upon one's behaviour. a familiar phrase, noting such a
state as requires great caution; a state in which a failure in
behaviour will have bad consequences. -
tyrants themselves are upon their behaviour to a superiour
power. l’estrange.
to be head. v. a. [from be and head..] to deprive of the head;
to kill by cutting off the head.
his beheading he underwent with all christian magnanimity.
clarendon.
on each side they fly,
by chains connext, and, with destructive sweep,
behead whole troops at once. philips.
mary, queen of scots, was beheaded in the reign of queen
elizabeth. addison.
beheld. particip, passive, from behold; which see.
all hail ye virgin daughters of the main
ye streams, beyond my hopes beheld again! pope.
be'he moth. n.s., behemoth, in hebrew, signifies beasts in ge-
neral, particularly the larger kind, fit for service. but job
speaks of an animal behemoth, and describes its properties. bo-
chart has taken much care to make it the hippopotamus, or river
horse. sanelius thinks it is an ox. the fathers suppose the
devil to be meant by it. but we agree with the generality of
interpreters, that it is the elephant. calmet.
behold now behemoth, which i made with thee; he eateth
grass as an ox. job.
behold ! in plaited mail
thomson.
behemoth rears his head.
#!" n. s. valerian roots. also a fruit resembling the ta-
ben. marisk, from which perfumers extract an oil. diff.
behe'st. n. s. [from be and host; haer, saxon.) command;
precept ; mandate.
her tender youth had obediently lived under her parents
behesis, without framing, out of her own will, the forechoosing
of any thing.
such joy he had their stubborn hearts to quell,
and sturdy courage tame with dreadful awe,
that his behest they fear'd as a proud tyrant's law. spensor.
1, messenger from everlasting jove,
sidney.
in his great name thus his behest do tell. fair/ax.
to visit oft those happy tribes,
on high behests his angels to and fro
pass'd frequent. milon,
in heav'n god ever blest, and his divine
behsis obey, worthiest to be obey'd aolton.
to be h 1 ght. v. a. pret, behot, part. behight. [from hatan, to
promise, sax.]
1. to promise: this word is obsolete.
sir guyon, mindful of his vow yplight,
up rose from drowsy couch, and him addrest,
unto the journey which he had behight.
2. to entrust; to commit.
that most glorious house that glist’reth bright,
whereof the keys are to thy hand behight
by wise fidelia. fairy queen.
3. perhaps to call; to name; hight being often put, in old au-
thors, for named, or was named.
beh1'n d. prep. [hinban, saxon.]
1. at the back of another.
acomates hasted with harquebusiers, which he had caused
fairy queen.
his horsemen to take behind them upon their horses. knoles.
2. cn the back part; not before.
she came in the press behind, and touched him. mark.
3. towards the back.
the benjamites looked behind them. judges.
4. following another. -
her husband went with her, weeping behind her. samuel.
5. remaining after the departure of something else.
he left behind him, myself, and a sister, both born in one
hour. shakespeare.
piety and virtue are not only delightful for the present, but
they leave peace and contentment behind them. tilson.
6. remaining after the death of those to whom it belonged.
what he gave me to publish, was but a small part of what
he left behind him. pope.
7. at a distance from something going before.
such is the swiftness of your mind,
that, like the earth's, it leaves our sense behind. dryden.
8. inferiour to another, having the posteriour place with regard
to excellence.
after the overthrow of this first house of god, a second
was erected; but with so great odds, that they wept, which
beheld how much this latter came behind it. hocker.
9. on the other side of something.
from light retir’d, behind his daughter's bed,
he, for approaching sleep, compos'd his head. dryden.
beh1'nd. adv.
1. out of sight; not yet produced to view; remaining.
we cannot be sure, that we have all the particulars before
us; and that there is no evidence behind, and yet unseen, which
may cast the probability on the other side. locke.
2. most of the former senses may become advertial, by suppres-
sing the accusative case; as, i left my money behind, or be-
hind me.
beh1'ndhan d. adv. [from behind and hand.]
1. in a state in which rent or profit, or any advantage, is anti-
cipated, so that less is to be received, or more performed, than
the natural or just proportion.
your trade would suffer, if your being behindhand has made
the natural use so high, that your tradesman cannot live upon
his labour. locke.
2. not upon equal terms, with regard to forwardness. in this
sense, it is followed by with.
consider, whether it is not better to be half a year behind-
hand with the fashionable part of the world, than to strain be-
ond his circumstances. speciator.
3. shakespeare uses it as an adjective, but licentiously, for back-
ward ; tardy. -
and these thy offices,
so rarely kind, are as interpreters
of my behindhand slackness. shakespeare.
to behold. v. a. pret. i beheld, i have beheld, or beholden.
[behealban, saxon.] to view; to see ; to look upon ; to
behold is to see, in an emphatical or intensive sense.
son of man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine
ears. ezekiel.
when thessalians on horseback were beheld afar off, while
their horses watered, while their heads were depressed, they
were conceived by the spectators to be one animal.
brown's vulgar errours.
man looks aloft, and, with erected eyes,
beholds his own hereditary skies. dryden.
at this the former tale again he told,
with thund'ring tone, and dreadful to lehold. dryden.
the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 241</div><p class="text">b e h
b e l
the saviour comes by ancient bards foretold
hear him ye deaf, and all ye blind b.h...d. pte.
bo hold interject. [from the verb.] see; lo: a word by which
attention is excited, or admiration noted.
beha'a " i am with thee, and will keep thee. geness.
when out of hope, behold her not far off,
such as i saw her in iny dream, adorn'd
with what all earth or heaven could bestow,
to make her amiable milton.
be hold e.n. particip. off. [gchoudon, dutch; that is, held in
obligation. it is very corruptly written beholding.] ob-
liged ; bound in gratitude: with the particle to.
holms, which such as you are fain to be beholden to your
wives for. shakespeare.
little are we beholden to your love,
and little looked for at your helping hands. shakesh.
i found you next; in respect of bond both of near alliance,
and particularly of communication in studies: wherein i must
acknowledge myself beholden to you. bacon.
i think myself mightily beholden to you for the reprehension
ou then gave us. - addison.
we, who see men under the awe of justice, cannot conceive,
what savage creatures they would be without it; and how
much beholden we are to that wise contrivance. atterbury.
b e ho lder. m. s. [from behold.] spectator; he that looks up-
on any thing.
was this the face,
that, like the sun, did make beholders wink
these beasts among
beholders rude, and shallow to discern
half what in thee is fair, one man except,
shakesp.
who sees thee 2 milton.
things of wonder give no less delight
to the wise maker's, than beholder's fight. denham.
the justling chiefs in rude encounters join,
each fair beholder trembling for her knight. granville.
the charitable foundations in the church of rome, exceed
all the demands of charity, and raise envy, rather than compas-
fion, in the breasts of beholders. atterbury.
be holding. adj. [corrupted from beholden.] obliged. see
be hol. den.
beho'ld in g. n.s. obligation.
love to virtue, and not to any particular beholdings, hath
expressed this my testimony. carew.
be hold in g.n ess. n. s. [from beholding, mistaken for beholden.]
the state of being obliged.
the king invited us to his court, so as i must acknowledge
a beholdingness unto him. sidney.
in this my debt i seem'd loth to confess,
in that i shunn'd beholdingness. donne.
be hoof. n.s. [from behoove.] that which behoves ; that
which is advantageous ; profit; advantage.
her majesty may alter any thing of those laws, for her own
lehoof, and for the good of the people. speoser.
no mean recompence it brings
to your behoof: if i that region lost,
all usurpation thence expell’d, reduce
to her original darkness, and your sway. milton.
wer’t thou some star, which, from the ruin’d rocf
of shak'd olympus, by mischance didst fall;
which careful jove, in nature's true behoof,
took up, and in fit place did reinstate. milton.
because it was for the behoof of the animal, that, upon any
sudden accident, it might be awakened, there were no shuts
or stopples made for the ears. ray.
it would be of no behoof, for the settling of government, un-
less there were a way taught, how to know the person to whom
belonged this power and dominion. locke.
70 beho'ove. v. n. [behogan, saxon; it is a duty..] to be
fit; to be meet ; either with respe&amp;t to duty, necessity, or con-
venience. it is used only impersonally with it.
for better examination of their quality, it behooveth the very
foundation and root, the highest wellspring and fountain of
them, to be discovered. hooker.
he did so prudently temper his passions, as that none of
them made him wanting in the offices of life, which it behooved,
or became him to perform. atterbury.
but should you lure the monarch of the brook,
behooves you then to ply your finest art. thomson.
be ho'ov eful. adj. [from behoof..] useful; profitable; advan-
tageous. this word is somewhat antiquated.
it is very behooveful in this country of ireland, where there
are waste deserts full of grass, that the same should be eaten
down. spensor.
laws are many times full of imperfeotions; and that which
is supposed behoovesul unto men, proveth oftentimes most per-
nicious. hooker.
madam, we have culled such necessaries
as are behooveful for our state to-morrow. shakespeare.
it may be most behoovesol for princes, in matters of grace, to
transact the same publickly: so it is as requisite, in matters of
vol. i.
judgment, punishment, and censure, that the same be trans-
acted privately. clcrendon.
behoove fully. adv. [from behoovesul..] profitably; usefully.
tell us of more weighty dislikes than these, and that may
more behoovefully import the reformation. spenser.
behoor. [preterite, as it seeins, of behight, to promise.]
with sharp intended sting so rude him smote,
that to the earth him drove as stroken dead,
ne living wight would have him life behot.
e’ing. particip. [from be.]
those, who have their hope in another life, look upon
themselves as being on their passage through this. atterbury.
betn g. m. s. [from be.]
1. existence; opposed to nonentity. -
of him all things have both received their first being, and
fairy queen.
y &amp;
their continuance to be that which they are. hooker.
yet is not god the author of her ill,
though author of her being, and being there. davies.
there is none but he,
whose being i do fear: and under him -
my genius is rebuked. shakesp. macbeth.
thee, father, first they sung, omnipotent,
immutable, immortal, infinite, -
eternal king ! thee, author of all being, -
fountain of light ! milton's paradis. loft.
merciful and gracious, thou gavest us being, raising us from
nothing to be an excellent creation. taylor's guide to devotion.
consider every thing as not yet in being; then examine, if
it must needs have been at all, or what other ways it might
have been. bentley.
2. a particular state or condition.
those happy spirits, which ordain’d by fate
for future being, and new bodies wait. dryden.
heav'n from all creatures hides the book of fate;
from brutes what men, from men what spirits know;
or who could suffer being here below pope.
as now your own, our beings were of old,
and once inclos'd in woman's beauteous mould. pope.
3. the person existing.
ah, fair, yet false; ah, being form'd to cheat,
by seeming kindness, mixt with deep deceit. dryden.
it is folly to seek the approbation of any being, besides the
supreme; because no other being can make a right judgment of
us, and because we can procure no considerable advantage
from the approbation of any other being. addison. speciator.
be'ing. conjunct. [from be..] since. dic.
be it so. a phrase of anticipation, soppose it be so; or of per-
mission, let it be so.
my gracious duke,
be’t so she will not here, before your grace,
consent to marry with demetrius;
i beg the ancient privilege of athens. shakespeare.
to bela bou r. v. a. [from be and labour.] to beat; to
thump : a word in low speech.
what several madnesses in men appear,
orestes runs from fancy'd furies here;
ajax belabours there an harmless ox,
and thinks that agamemnon feels the knocks.
he sees virago nell belabour, -
with his own staff, his peaceful neighbour. swift.
to bela’ce. v. a. [sea term.] to fasten; as to belace a rope. d.
belamie. n.s.. [bel amie, fr.] a friend; an intimate. this
word is out of use.
dryden.
wise socrates
pour'd out his life, and last philosophy;
to the fair critias, his dearest belamie. fairy queen.
be'lamour. m. s. [bel amour, fr.] gallant; consort ; para-
mour: obsolete.
lo, lo, how brave she decks her bounteous bow'r,
with silken curtains, and gold coverlets;
therein to shroud her sumptuous belamour. fairy queen.
belated. adj. [from be and late.] benighted; out of doors
late at night.
fairy elves,
whose midnight revels, by a forest side,
or fountain, some belated peasant sees, -
or dreams he sees. milton's parads, l37.
or near fleetditch's oozy brinks -
belated, seems on watch to lie. swift.
to belazy. v. a. [from be and lay; as, to waylay, to lie in wait,
to lay wait for.]
1. to block up ; to stop the passage.
the speedy horse all passages belay,
and spur their smoaking steeds to cross their way. dryden.
2. to place in ambush. -
'gainst such strong castles needeth greater might,
than those snall forces ye were wont bilay. spensor.
to belay a rope. [sea term.] to splice; to mend a rope, by
laying one end over another.
t, belch. v. n. [bealcan, saxon.]
1. to eject the wind from the stomach; to eruct.
yy the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 242</div><p class="text">b e l
b e l
the waters boil, and, belching from below,
black sands as from a forceful engine throw. dryden.
the symptoms are, a four smell in their faeces, bothings,
and distensions of the bowels. arbuthnot on aliments.
2. to issue out, as by eructation.
a triple pile of plumes his crest adorn'd,
on which with belching flames chimaera burn'd. dryden.
t, belch. v. a. to throw out from the stomach; to eject
from any hollow place. it is a word implying coarseness ;
hatefulness; or horrour.
they are all but stomachs, and we all but food;
they eat us hungerly, and, when they’re full, -
they belch us. shakespeare.
the bitterness of it i now belch from my heart. shakespeare.
immediate in a flame,
but soon obscur'd with smoke, all heav'n appear'd,
from those deep-throated engines belch'd. milton.
the gates that now -
stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
far into chaos, since the fiend pass'd through. milton.
rough as their savage lords who rang'd the wood,
and, fat with acorns, belch'd their windy food. dryden.
there belcht the mingl’d streams of wind and blood,
and human flesh, his indigested food. pope's odyssey.
when i an am’rous kiss design'd, -
i belch'd an hurricane of wind. swift.
belch. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the aet of eructation.
2. a cant term for malt liquor.
a sudden reformation would follow, among all sorts of peo-
ple; porters would no longer be drunk with bekh. dennis.
belda. m. n. s. [belle dame, which, in old french, signified pro-
bably an old woman, as belle age, old age.]
1. an old woman; generally a term of contempt, marking the
last degree of old age, with all its faults and miseries.
then sing of secret things that came to pass,
when beldam nature in her cradle was. milton.
2. a hag.
why, how now, hecat, you look angerly?—
—have i not reason, beldams, as you are :
saucy and overbold 2 shakesp. macbeth.
the resty fieve wagg’d ne'er the more;
i weep for woe, the testy beldam swore. dryden.
to beleaguer. v. a. [be'eggeren, dutch..] to besiege ; to
block up a place; to lie before a town.
their business, which they carry on, is the general concern-
ment of the trojan camp, then beleaguer'd by turnus and the
latins. dryden's dufresnoy.
against belongur'd heav'n the giants move:
hills pil'd on hills, on mountains mountains lie,
to make their mad approaches to the sky. dryden.
bele(aguerer. n.s.. [from beleaguer.] one that besieges a place.
to be l e e'. v. a. [a term in navigation.] to place in a direc-
tion unsuitable to the wind.
belemn 1ores. n. s. [from £332, a dart or arrow, because of
its resemblance to the point of an arrow.] arrowhead, or fin-
ger-stone, of a whitish and sometimes a gold colour.
bel flow er. m. s. [from belle and flower, because of the shape
of its flower; in latin campanula.) a plant.
there is a vast number of the species of this plant. 1. the
tallest pyramidal beft wer. 2. the blue peach-leav'd belower.
3. the white peach-leaved beftower. 4. garden beflower,
with oblong leaves and flowers; commonly called canterbury
bells. 5. canary beft wer, with orrach leaves and a tuberose
root. 6. blue belflower, with edible roots, commonly called
rampions. 7. venus looking-glass beflower, &amp;c. miller.
belfo'under. m. s. [from bell and found.] he whose trade it
is to found or cast bells.
those that make recorders know this, and likewise bel-
founders in fitting the tune of their bells. bacon.
be'lfry. m. s. [boffroy, in french, is a tower; which was per-
haps the true word, till those, who knew not its original, cor-
rupted it to belfry, because bells were in it..] the place where
the bells are rung. -
fetch the leathern bucket that hangs in the befty; that is
curiously painted before, and will make a figure. gay.
belgard. m. s. [belle gard, fr.] a soft glance; a kind re-
gard: an old word, now wholly disused.
upon her eyelids many graces sat,
under the shadow of her even brows,
working belgards, and amorous retreats.
to bel (e. v. a. [from be and lie ]
1. to counterfeit ; to feign; to mimick.
which durst, with horses hoofs that beat the ground,
and martial brass, belie the thunder's sound. dryden.
the shape of man, and imitated beast
the walk, the words, the gesture could supply,
the habit mimick, and the mien belie. dryden.
2. to give the lie to ; to charge with falsehood.
sure there is none but fears a future state;
and when the most obdurate swear they do not,
their trembling hearts belie their boastful tongues, dryden,
fairy queen.
paint, patches, jewels laid aside,
at night astronomers “gree,
the evening has the day b.ly'd,
and phillis is some forty-three. prizr.
3. to calumniate; to raise false reports of any man.
thou dost belie him, piercy, thou belies him:
he never did encounter with glendower. shakoshcare.
4. to give a false representation of any thing.
uncle, for heav'n's sake, comfortable words.-
—should i do so, i should belie my thoughts. shakspeare.
tuscan valerus by force o'ercame,
and not bey’d his mighty father's name. dryden's zneid.
in the dispute whate'er i said,
my heart was by my tongue bey'd;
and in my looks you might have read,
how much i argu'd on your side. prior.
5. to fill with lies. this seems to be its meaning here.
'tis slander, whose breath
rides on the posting winds, and doth belie
all corners of the world. shakoff. cymbeline.
bf 11'ef. m. s. [from believe.] -
1. credit given to something which we know not of ourselves,
on account of the authority by which it is delivered.
those comforts that shall never cease,
future in hope, but present in lesios. jp'offan.
faith is a firm bel of of the whole word of god, of his go-
spel, commands, threats, and promises. - //ake.
2. the theological virtue of faith, or firm confidence of the
truths of religion.
no man can attain belief by the bare contemplation of heaven
and earth; for that they neither are sufficient to give us as
much as the least spark of light concerning the very principal
mysteries of our faith. hocker.
3. religion; the body of tenets held by the professors of faith.
in the heat of general persecution, whereunto christian be-
lef was subject upon the first promulgation, it much confirm-
ed the weaker minds, when relation was made how god had
been glorified through the sufferings of martyrs. hooker.
4. persuasion ; opinion.
he can, i know, but doubt to think he will;
yet hope would fain subscribe, and tempts belief. mohan.
all treaties are grounded upon the belief, that states will be
found in their honour and observince of treaties. temple.
5. the thing believed; the object of belief.
superstitious prophecies are not only the belis of fools, but
the talk sometimes of wise men. bacon.
6. creed; a form containing the articles of faith.
believable. adj. [from believe..] credible; that which may
be credited or believed.
to believe. v. a. soloran, saxon.]
1. to credit upon the authority of another, or from some other
reason than our personal knowledge.
adherence to a proposition, which they are persuaded, but
do not know to be true, is not seeing, but beiving. locke.
ten thousand things there are, which we believe merely up-
on the authority or credit of those who have spoken or writ-
ten of them. // atti's logicæ.
2. to put confidence in the veracity of any one.
the people may hear when i speak with thee, and believe
thee for ever. exodus-
to be li'eve. v. n. -
1. to have a firm persuasion of any thing.
they may believe that the lord god of their fathers, the
god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob,
hath appeared unto thee. genosis.
2. to exercise the theological virtue of faith.
now god be prais'd, that, to believing souls,
gives light in darkness, comfort in despair. shakes care.
for with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation. romans.
3. with the particle in ; to hold as an object of faith.
b.lieve in the lord your god, so shall you be established.
2 chron.
4. with the particle upon; to trust; to place full confidence in;
to rest upon with faith.
to them gave he power to become the sons of god, even
to them that believe on his name. john.
5. i believe, is sometimes used as a way of flightly noting some
want of certainty or exactness.
though they are, i believe, as high as most steeples in eng-
land, yet a person, in his drink, fell down, without any other
hurt than the breaking of an arm. addison on italy.
beli'ev er. m. s. [from believe.]
1. he that believes, or gives credit. -
discipline began to enter into conflict with churches, which,
in extremity, had been believers of it. hocker.
2. a professor of christianity.
infidels themselves did discern in matters of life, when be-
lievers did well, when otherwise. hozier.
if he which writeth, do that which is forcible, how should
he which readeth, be thought to do that, which, in itself, is of
no force to work belief, and to save believer; ? hooker.
3 mysteries
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 243</div><p class="text">b e l
b e l
mysłcries held by us have no power, pomp, or wealth, but
have been maintained by the universal body of true believer,
from the days of the apostles, and will be to the resurrection ;
neither will the gates of hell prevail against them. - swift.
b e 1.1 evin gly. adv. [sroin to believe..] after a believing man-
inct.
beli'k e. adv. [from like, as ly likelihood.]
1. probably ; likely; perhaps.
there came out of the same woods a horrible foul bear,
which fearing, belike, while the lion was present, came fu-
1iously towards the place where i was. sidney.
lord angelo, belike, thinking me remiss in my office, awa-
kens me with this unwonted putting on. shakespeare.
josephus affirmeth, that one of them remained in his time;
meaning, belike, some ruin or foundation thereof. raleigh.
2. it is sometimes used in a sense of irony; as, it may be supposed.
we think, belike, that he will accept what the meanest of
them would disdain. hooker.
god appointed the sea to one of them, and the land to the
other, because they were so great, that the sea could not hold
them both ; for else, belike, if the sea had been large enough, we
might have gone a fishing for elephants.
brerewood on languages.
beli've, adv. [bilive, sax. probably from bi and life, in the
sense of vivacity; speed; quickness.] speedily ; quickly : a
word out of use.
by that same way the direful dames to drive
their mournful chariot, fill'd with rusty blood,
and down to pluto's house are come belive. fairy queen.
bell. n. s. [bel, saxon ; supposed, by skinner, to come from
pelvis, lat. a basin. see ball.]
1. a vessel, or hollow body of cast metal, formed to make a noise
by the act of a clapper, hammer, or some other instrument
striking against it. bells are in the towers of churches, to
call the congregation together.
your flock assembled by the bell,
encircled you to hear with rev'rence. shakespeare.
get thee gone, and dig my grave thyself,
and bid the merry bells ring to thy ear,
that thou art crowned, not that i am dead. shakespeare.
four bel's admit twenty-four changes in ringing, and five
bells one hundred and twenty. holder's elements of speech.
he has no one necessary attention to anything, but the bell,
which calls to prayers twice a-day. addison. spectator.
2. it is used for anything in the form of a bell, as the cups of
flowers.
where the bee sucks, there suck i,
in a cowslip's bell i lie. shakes. temps.
the humming bees that hunt the golden dew,
in summer's heat on tops of lilies feed,
and creep within their tells to suck the balmy seed. dryden.
3. a small holiow globe of metal perforated, and containing in it
a solid ball; which, when it is shaken, by bounding against
the sides, gives a sound.
as the ox hath his yoke, the horse his curb, and the faul-
con his bels, so hath man his desires. shakesp. as you like it.
4. to bear the bell. to be the first; from the wether, that car-
ries a bell among the sheep, or the first horse of a drove that has
bells on his collar.
the italians have carried away the bell from all other nations,
as may appear both by their books and works. hakewill.
5. to shake the bells. a phrase, in shakespeare, taken from the bells
of a hawk.
neither the king, nor he that loves him best,
the proudest he that holds up lancaster,
dares stir a wing, if warwick shakes his bel's. shakespeare.
to bell. v. n. [from the noun..] to grow in buds or flowers,
in the form of a bell.
hops, in the beginning of august, bell, and are sometimes
ripe. mortimer.
bell-fash16ned. adj. [from bell and fashion.] having the
form of a bell; campaniform.
the thorn apple rises with a strong round stalk, having large
bell fashioned flowers at the joints. mortimer.
belle. n.s.. [beau, tele, fr.] a young lady.
what motive could compel
a well-bred lord t assault a gentle belle p
o say, what stranger cause yet unexplor’d,
could make a gentle belle reject a lord pope.
belles leitres. m. s. [fr.] polite literature. it has no
singular.
the exactness of the other, is to admit of something like
discourse, especially in what regards the belles lettres.
bellibon e. m. s. [from belius, beautiful, and bonus, good, lat.
belle s bonne, fr.]. a woman excelling both in beauty and
goodness. a word now out of use.
pan may be proud, that ever he begot
such a belibone,
and syrinx rejoice, that ever was her lot
to bear such a one. spenser.
#::::::...}a}. [belliger, lat.j waging war. dic7.
tatler. .
be'll sq. m. s. a hunting term, spoke of a roe, when she
makes a noise in rutting time. 101.7.
belli por ent, adj. [tellipoten, lat.] puiss.nt; mighty in
war. die?.
to be'llow. v. n. [bellan, saxon.}
1. to make a noise as a bull.
jupiter became a bull, and below'd; the green neptune
a ram, and bleated. shakespeare.
what bull dares below, or what sheep dares bleat
within the lion's den : dryden.
but now, the husband of a herd must be
thy mate, and tellowing sons thy progeny. dryden.
2. to make any violent outcry.
he fasten’d on my neck, and bellow'd out,
as he'd burst heav'n. shakes care.
3. to vociferate; to clamour.
contempt.
the dull fat captain, with a hound's deep throat,
would bellow out a laugh in a base note. dryden.
this gentleman is accustomed to roar and below so terribly
loud, that he frightens us. tatler.
4. to roar as the sea in a storm; or as the wind; to make any
continued noise, that may cause terrour.
till, at the last, he heard a dread sound,
which through the wood loud belowing did rebound. spens.
the rising rivers float the nether ground;
and rocks the bellowing voice of boiling seas rebound. dryd.
be'llows: n, s. [bilic, sax, perhaps it is corrupted from telli,
the wind being contained in the hollow, or beiy. it has no sin-
gular; for we usually, say, a pair of bellows; but dryden has
used bellows as a singular.]
1. the instrument used to blow the fire.
since fighs into my inward furnace turned,
for bellows serve to kindle more the fire.
one, with great belows, gather'd filling air,
and, with forc'd wind, the fuel did enfl. me. fairy queen.
the smith prepares his hammer for the stroke,
while the lung'd bellows hising fire provoke. dryden.
the lungs, as bellows, supply a force of breath; and the
espera arteria is as the nose of bellows, to collect and convey
the breath.
in this sense it is a word of
sidney.
holder.
2. in the following passage, it is singular.
thou neither, like a bellows, swell'st thy face,
as if thou wert to blow the burning mass
of melting ore. dryden.
be'lluin e. adj. [belluinus, lat.] beastly; belonging to a beast;
savage; brutal.
if human actions were not to be judged, men would have
no advantage over beasts. at this fate, the animal and tel-
luine life would be the best. atterbury.
bet.l.y. m. s. [bag, dutch ; bol, bola, welch.]
1. that part of the human body which reaches from the breast
to the thighs, containing the bowels.
the body's members
rebell'd against the belly; thus accus'd it;—
that only like a gulf it did remain,
still cupboarding the viand, never bearin
like labour with the rest. shakespeare,
2. in beasts, it is used, in general, for that part of the body
next the ground.
and the lord said unto the serpent, upon thy belly shalt thou
go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life. genesis.
3. the womb: in this sense, it is commonly used ludicrously or
familiarly.
i shall answer that better, than you can the getting up of
the negro's belly: the moor is with child by you. sha&amp;#3are.
the secret is grown too big for the pretence, like mrs.
primly's beg belly. congreve.
4. that part of man which requires food, in opposition to the
back, or that which demands clothes.
they were content with a licentious life, wherein they
might fill their bellies by spoil, rather than by labour. hayward.
whose god is their bely. phil.
he that sows his grain upon marble, will have many a hun-
gry belly before harvest. arbuthnot.
5. the part of any thing that swells out into a larger capacity.
fortune sometimes turneth the handle of the bottle, which
is easy to be taken hold of; and, after the belly, which is hard
to grasp. bacon.
an irish harp hath the concave, or belly, not along the strings,
but at the end of the strings. bacon.
6. any place in which something is inclosed.
out of the belly of hell cried i, and thou heardst my voice.
‘fanah.
to be'lly. v. n. [from the noun..] to swell into a larger ca-
pacity; to hang out; to bulge out.
thus by degrees day wastes, signs cease to rise,
for bellying earth, still rising up, denies
their light a passage, and confines our eyes.
creech's manilius.
the pow'r appeas'd, with winds suffic'd the sail,
the belying canvas strutted with the gale. dryden.
- loud
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 244</div><p class="text">b e l
b e m
- loud rattling shakes the mountains and the plain,
heav'n belies downwards, and descends in rain. dryden.
'midst these disports, forget they not to drench -
| themselves with belying goblets. philips.
be'lly ach.e. [from belly and ache.] the cholick; or pain in
- the bowels.
| be'lly bound. adj. [from belly and bound..] diseased, so as to
be costive, and shrunk in the belly.
be lly-fretting n.s.. [from belly and fret.]
1. [with farriers..] the chafing of a horse's belly with the fore-
litt.
..", great pain in a horse's belly caused by worms.
- belly fu l. m. s. [from belly and full.]
1. as much food as fills the belly, or satisfies the appetite.
2. it is often used ludicrously for more than enough ; thus, king
james told his son that he would have his bellyful of parliamen-
tary impeachments.
be'lly god. m. s. [from belly and god..] a glutton ; one who
makes a god of his belly.
- what infinite waste they made this way, the only story of
apicius, a famous bellygod, may suffice to shew. hakewill.
belly-p1nched. adj. [from belly and pinch..] starved.
- this night, wherein the cubdrawn bear would couch,
the lion, and the belly-pinched wolf,
keep their furr dry ; unbonnetted he runs. shakespeare.
be'lly roll. n.s.. [from belly and roll j a roll so called, as it
seems, from entering into the hollows.
they have two small harrows that they clap on each fide of
the ridge, and so they harrow right up and down, and roll it
with a bellyroll, that goes between the ridges, when they have
sown it. amortimer.
be'lly-tim ber. n.s.. [from belly and timber.] food; mate-
rials to support the belly.
where bely-timber, above ground
dic7.
or under, was not to be found. hudibras.
the strength of every other member
is founded on your belly-timber. prior.
be'lly-wor m. m. s. [from belly and warm.] a worm that
breeds in the belly.
bel man. m. s. [from bell and man.] he whose business it is to
proclaim anything in towns, and to gain attention by ringing
his bell. -
it was the owl that skriek'd, the fatal belman
which gives the stern'st good night. shakespeare.
* where titian's glowing paint the canvas warm’d,
now hangs the belman's song, and pasted here
o the colour'd prints of overton appear. gay.
the besman of each parish, as he goes his circuit, cries out
every night, past twelve o'clock. swift.
, be lmetal. m. s. [from ball and metal.] the metal of which
bells are made; being a mixture of five parts copper with one
of pewter.
belmetal has copper one thousand pounds, tin from three
hundred to two hundred pounds, brass one hundred and fifty
pounds. bacon.
colours which arise on belmetal, when melted and poured
on the ground, in open air, like the colours of water bubbles,
are changed by viewing them at divers obliquities. newton.
to belo'ck. v. a. [from be and lock.] to fasten, as with a
lock.
this is the hand, with which a vow'd contract
was fast belock'd in thine. shakoffeare.
be'lomancy. m. s. [from 3:33, and 9.2:142.]
belomancy, or divination by arrows, hath been in request
with scythians, alans, germans, with the africans and
turks of algier. brown's wulgar errours.
to belo/ng. v. n. [belangen, dutch.]
1. to be the property of.
to light on a part of a field belonging to boaz. ruth.
2. to be the province or business of.
there is no need of such redress;
or if there were, it not belongs to you. shakesheare.
the declaration of these latent philosophers belongs to ano-
other paper. boyle.
to jove the care of heav'n and earth belongs. dryden.
3. to adhere, or be appendent to.
he went into a desart belonging to bethsaida. luke.
4. to have relation to.
to whom belonges thou? whence art thou ? 1 samuel.
5. to be the quality or attributes of.
the faculties belonging to the supreme spirit, are unlimited
and boundless, fitted and designed for infinite objects. cheyne.
6. to be referred to ; to relate to.
he careth for things that belong to the lord. i corinth.
belov ep. participle. [from belove, derived of love. it is ob-
servable, that though the participle be of very frequent use,
the verb is seldom or never admitted; as we say, you are much
beloved by me, but not, i belove you..] loved ; dear.
i think, it is not meet,
mark anthony, so well below'd of caesar,
* should outlive caesar. shakespeare,
-
. . in likeness of a dove
the spirit descended, while the father's voice
from heav'n pronounc'd him his beloved son. a zion.
below. prop. [from he and low.]
1. under in place; not so high.
for all below the moon i would not leap. shakoeare.
he'll beat aufidius' head below his knee,
and tread upon his neck. sła koza, e.
.2. inferiour in dignity.
the noble venetians think themselves equal at least to the
electors of the empire, and but one degree below kings. zozo.
3. inferiour in excellence. c ./
his idylliums of theocritus are as much below his manili.
us, as the fields are below the stars. felton.
4. unworthy of ; unbefitting.
'tis much below me on his throne to fit;
but when i do, you shall petition it. dryden.
below. adv.
1. in the lower place; in the place nearest the center.
to men standing below on the ground, those that be on the
top of paul's, seem much less than they are, and cannot be
known ; but, to men above, those below seem nothing so much
lessened, and may be known. * bao.
the upper regions of the air perceive the colle&amp;ion of the
matter of the tempests and winds before the air here below;
and therefore the obscuring of the smaller stars, is a sign of
tempest following. bacon.
his sultry heat infects the sky;
the ground lelow is parch'd, the heav'ns above us fry. dry.
this said, he led them up the mountain's brow,
and shew'd them all the shining fields below. dryder.
2. on earth, in opposition to heaven.
and let no tears from erring pity flow, ... --
for one that's bless'd above, immortaliz’d below. smith.
the fairest child of jove,
below for ever sought, and bless'd above. prizr.
3. in hell; in the regions of the dead : opposed to heaven and
earth.
the gladsome ghosts in circling troops attend,
delight to hover near ; and long to know
what business brought him to the realms below. drydon.
when suffing saints aloft in beams shall glow,
and prosp’rous traitors gnash their teeth below. tickell.
70 bf low t. v. a. [from to and lowt, a word of contempt
to treat with opprobrious language; to call names. obsolete.
sieur gaulard, when he heard a gentleman report, that at
a supper, they had not only good cheer, but also favoury epi-
grams, and fine anagrams, returning home, rated and hooked
his cock, as an ignorant scullion, that never dressed him either
epigrams or anagrams. camden.
belsw a go er. m. s. a cant word for a whoremaster.
you are a charitable beswagger; my wife cried out fire, and
you cried out for engines. dryarn.
belt. n.s.. [belt, sax. baltheus, lat..] a girdle; a cineture
in which a sword, or some weapon, is commonly hung.
he cannot buckle his distemper'd cause o
within the belt of rule. shakespeare.
ajax flew himself with the sword given him by hector,
and hector was dragged about the walls of troy by the be:
given him by ajax. south-
then snatch'd the shining belt, with gold inlaid;
the belt eurytion's artful hands had made. dryder.
belw eth f r. m. s. [from bell and wether.] a sheep which leads
the flock with a bell on his neck.
the fox will serve my sheep to gather,
and drive to follow after their belwether. spensor.
to offer to get your living by the copulation of cattle ; to
be a bawd to a belwether. shakespeare.
the flock of sheep and belwether thinking to break into
another's pasture, and being to pass over another bridge, just-
led till both fell into the ditch. howel.
to bely'. see belie. -
to bema'd. v. a. [from be and mad.] to make mad; to turn
the brain.
making just report,
• of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow,
the king hath cause to plain. shakespeare.
to bem1 re. v. a. [from be and mire.] to drag, or incumber
in the mire ; to soil by passing through dirty places.
away they rode in homely sort,
their journey long, their money short,
the loving couple well lemir’d;
the horse and both the riders tir’d. swift.
to bemo'an. v. a. [from to moan.] to lament; to bewail 3
to express sorrow for.
he falls, he fills the house with heavy groans,
implores their pity, and his pain bemoans.
the gods themselves the ruin'd seats bemoan,
and blame the mischiefs that themselves have done. addis.
bemo'aner. m. s. [from the verb.] a lamenter; the person
that laments.
dryen.
72
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 245</div><p class="text">b e n
b e n
o
to be mo'ck. v. a. [from mock.] to treat with mocks.
bemock the modest moon. shakespeare.
t, bemo'il. v. a. [be and mail, from mouiller, fr.] to be-
draggle; to bemire; to encumber with dirt and mire.
thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place, how she was
bemoised, how he left her with the horse upon her. shakesp.
t, b.e.mo'n's rer. v. a. [from be and monster.] to make mon-
strous.
thou chang'd, and self-converted thing! for shame,
bemonster not thy feature. shakespeare.
bemu's ed. adj. [from to mus...] overcome with musing;
dreaming: a word of contempt.
is there a parson much bemus'd in beer,
a maudlin poetess, a rhiming peer : pope.
bench. m. s. [benc, sax. banc, fr.]
1. a seat, distinguished from a stool by its greater length.
the scats and benches shone of ivory,
an hundred nymphs sat side by side about. spenser.
all rome is pleas'd, when statius will rehearse,
and longing crowds expect the promis'd verse;
his lofty numbers, with so great a gust,
they hear, and swallow with such eager lust:
but while the common suffrage crown'd his cause,
and broke the benches with their loud applause,
his muse had starv'd, had not a piece unread,
and by a player bought, supply'd her bread.
2. a seat of justice; the seat where judges fit.
to pluck down justice from your awful bench;
to trip the course of law. shakspeare.
cyriac, whose grandfire on the royal bench
of british themis, with no mean applause,
pronounc'd, and in his volumes taught our laws,
which others at their bar so often wrench. milton.
3. the persons fitting on a bench; as, the whole bench voted the
same way.
dryden.
fools to popular praise aspire,
of publick speeches, which worse fools admire ;
while, from both benche, with redoubl’d founds,
th’ applause of lords and commoners abounds.
t, bench. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to furnish with benches.
'twas bench'd with turf, and goodly to be seen,
the thick young grass arose in fresher green.
2. to seat upon a bench.
his cupbearer, whom i from meaner form
have bench'd, and rear'd to worship.
be'ncher. n.s. [from bench.] those gentlemen of the inns of
court are called benchers, who have been readers; they being
admitted to plead within the bar, are also called inner barristers.
the benchers, being the seniors of the house, are intrusted with
its government and direction, and out of them is a treasurer
yearly chosen. blount. chambers.
i was taking a walk in the gardens of lincoln's inn, a fa-
vour that is indulged me by several benchers, who are grown
old with me.
dryden.
dryden.
[benban, saxon ; bander, fr. as skinner thinks, from pandare,
lat.
i. #4. crooked ; to crook ; to infleoł.
the rainbow compasseth the heavens with a glorious circle,
and the hands of the most high hath bended it. ecclus.
they bend their bows, they whirl their slings around:
heaps of spent arrows fall, and strew the ground;
and helms, and shields, and rattling arms resound. dryden.
2. to direct to a certain point.
octavius and mark anthony
came down upon us with a mighty power,
b.nding their expedition tow’rd philippi.
shakespeare.
why dost thou bend thy eyes upon the earth,
and start so often, when thou fitt'st alone shakesheare.
your gracious eyes upon this labour bend. fairfax.
to that sweet region was our voyage bent,
when winds, and ev'ry warring eiement,
listurb’d our course. dryden.
then, with a rushing sound, th’ assembly land,
idiverse their steps; the rival rout ascend
the royal dome. pope.
3. to apply to a certain purpose; to intend the mind.
men will not bend their wits to examine, whether things,
wherewith they have been accustomed, be good or evil. hook.
he is within, with two right reverend fathers,
divinely bent to meditation. shakespeare.
when he fell into the gout, he was no longer able to bond
his mind or thoughts to any publick business. temple.
4. to put any thing in order for use; a metaphor taken from
bending the bow.
i'm settled, and beni up
each corporal agent to this terrible feat. shakespeare.
as a fowler was boudog bis net, a blackbird asked him what
he was doing? l'eslrange.
5. to incline.
but when to mischief mortals hend their will,
how soon they find fit instruments of ill pope.
vol. i. -
shakespeare. .
tatler.
*: bend. v. a. pret. bended, or bent; part. pass lended, or bent.
6. to subdue ; to make submissive : as, war and famine will
bend our enemies.
7. to bend the brow. to knit the brow; to frown.
some have been seen to bite their pen, scratch their head,
bend their brows, bite their lips, beat the board, and tear their
paper. camden.
to bend. v. n. -
1. to be incurvated.
2. to lean or jut over.
there is a cliff, whose high and bending head
looks fearfully on the confined deep. shakespeare.
3. to resolve; to determine: in this sense the participle is
commonly used. - - -
not so, for once, indulg'd they sweep the main,
-&gt;
deaf to the call, or, hearing, hear in vain;
but, bent on mischief, bear the waves before. dryden.
while good, and anxious for his friend, -
he's still severely bent against himself;
renouncing sleep, and rest, and food, and ease. addison.
a state of slavery, which they are bent upon with so much
eagerness and obstinacy. addison.
he is every where bent on instruction, and avoids all manner
of digressions. - addison.
4. to be submissive; to bow.
the sons of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto
thee. isaiah.
bend. n.s.. [from to bend.] -
1. flexure; incurvation.
'tis true, this god did shake;
his coward lips did from their colour fly;
and that same eye, whose bend doth awe the world,
did lose its lustre. shakespeare.
2. the crooked timbers which make the ribs or fides of a ship.
skinner.
3. [with heralds.] one of the eight honourable ordinaries, con-
taining a fifth when uncharged ; but when charged, a third part
of the escutcheon. it is made by two lines, drawn thwart-
ways from the dexter chief to the finister base point. harris.
ben dable. adj. [from bend..] that may be incurvated; that
may be inclined.
bender. m. s. [from to bend.]
1. the person who bends.
2. the instrument with which any thing is bent.
these bows, being somewhat like the long bows in use
amongst us, were bent only by a man's immediate strength,
without the help of any bender, or rack, that are used to
others. j/ilkins's mathematical magick.
be'ndw1th. n. s. an herb. - - - - idic7.
bene aped. adj. [from neap.] . a ship is said to be beneaped,
when the water does not flow high enough to bring her off the
ground, over a bar, or out of a dock. dicf.
bene’ath. prop. [beneo s, sax. beneden, dutch.]
1. under; lower in place. -
their woolly fleeces, as the rites requir’d,
he laid beneath him, and to rest retir’d.
ages to come might ormond's picture know;
and palms for thee beneath his laurels grow. prizr.
2. under, as overborne or overwhelmed by some pressure.
our country sinks beneath the yoke;
it weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
is added to her wounds. shakespeare.
and oft on rocks their tender wings they tear,
and sink beneath the burdens which they bear.
3. lower in rank, excellence, or dignity.
we have reason to be persuaded, that there are far more
species of creatures above us, than there are beneath. locke.
4. unworthy of ; unbeseeming; not equal to. -
he will do nothing that is beneath his high station, nor omit
doing any thing which becomes it. 4tterbury.
bene at h. adv.
1. in a lower place; under.
i destroyed the amorite before them ; i destroyed his fruits
from above, and his roots from beneath. amos.
the earth which you take from beneath, will be barren and
unfruitful. martimer.
2. below, as opposed to heaven.
any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
drydon.
dryden.
beneath. exodus.
trembling i view the dread abyss beneath,
hell's horrid mansions, and the realms of death. 27alden.
be'ned1ct. adj. [benedicius, lat.] having mild and salubrious
qualities: an old physical term.
it is not a small thing won in physick, if you can make rhu-
barb, and other medicines that are benedici, as strong purgers
as those that are not without some malignity. bacon.
ben e d1'ction. m. s. [benedic'iz, lat.]
1. blessing; a decretory pronunciation of happiness.
a sov’reign shame so bows him ; his unkindness,
that stript her from his lonedicion, turn'd her
to foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
to his doghearted daughters.
from him will raise
a mighty nation; and upon him show'r
z z his
skałos eart,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 246</div><p class="text">b e n
b e n
his benedicion so, that, in his seed,
all nations shall be blest. milton.
2. the advantage conferred by blessing. -
prosperty is the blessing of the old testament; adversity is
the blessing of the new ; which carrieth the greater benedic-
tion, and the clearer revelation of god's favour. bacon.
3. acknowledgments for bleijings received ; thanks.
could he less copect -
than glory and benedician, that is, thanks : milton.
such ingenious and industrious persons are delighted in
searching out natural rarities; reflecting upon the creator of
them his due praises and benediclions. ray.
4. the form of instituting an abbot.
what consecration is to a bishop, that benedicion is to an
abbot; but in a different way: for a bishop is not properly
such, till consecration; but an abbot, being elected and con-
firmed, is properly such before benedicssion. ayliffe.
benefa colon. m. s. [from lensacio, lat.]
1. the act of conferring a benefit.
2. the bcnefit conferred; which is the more usual sense.
- one part of the be; cf.cłions, was the expression of a gene-
rous and grateful mind. atterbury.
benefa cror. m. s. [from beneficio, lat.] he that confers a
benefit; frequently he that contributes to some public cha-
rity: it is used with of, but oftener with to, before the per-
son benefited.
then swell with pride, and must be titled gods,
great benefactors of mankind, deliverers,
worshipp'd with temple, priest, and sacrifice. milton.
from that preface he took his hint, though he had the base-
ness not to acknowledge his benefacaor. dryden.
i cannot but look upon the writer as my benefactor, if he
conveys to me an improvement of iny understanding. addison.
whoever makes ill returns to his binos.cf.r, must needs be
a common enemy to mankind. swift.
benefa corr ess. n. s. [from bengsador.] a woman who con-
fers a benefit.
be'n ef ice. n. s. [from longsi.i.am, lat..] advantage conferred
on another. this word is generally taken for all coclesiastical
livings, be they dignities or others. cowel.
and of the priest eft soons 'gan to enquire,
how to a benefice he night aspire. sponsor.
much to himself he thought, but little spoke, -
and, undepriv'd, his benefile forsook. drydew.
- be'ne fice d. adj. [f cm tenosice. j possessed of a benefice, or
church prefermeat.
the usual rate between the benefied man and the religious
person, was one moiety of the benefice. ayliffe.
benefice nce. n.s. (from bonficant..] the practice of doing
good ; active goodness.
you could not extend your beneficence to so many persons;
yet you have lost as few days as aurelius. dryden.
love and charity extends our beneficence to the miseries of
our brethren. rogers.
beneficent, a j. [from benefits, lengficentior, lat j kind;
doing good. it difiers from tenign, as the act from the disposi-
tion; beneficence being kindness, or benignity, exerted in action.
such a creature could not have his origination from any less
than the most wife and beneficent being, the great god. hale.
but phoebus, thou, to man beneficent,
delight'st in building cities. prior.
benefi’cial. adj. [from beneficium, lat.]
1. advantageous ; conferring bencfits; profitable; useful : with
to before the person benefited.
not any thing is made to be beneficial to him, but all things
for him, to shew beneficence and grace in them. hooker.
this supposilion grants the opinion to conduce to order in
the world, consequently to be very benefial to mankind. tillots.
- the war, which would have been most beneficial to us, and
destructive to the enemy, was neglected. swift.
are the present revolutions in circular orbs, more beneficial
than the other would be 2 bentley.
2. helpful ; medicinal.
in the first access of such a disease, any deobstruent, without
much acrimony, is beneficial. arbuthnot.
benefi’cial. m. s. an old word for a benefice.
for that the groundwork is, and end of all,
how to obtain a beneficial. spenser.
benefi'cially. adv, [from tensicial] advantageously; pro-
fitably ; helpfully.
benefi’cial n ess. m. s. [from beneftial.] usefulness; profit;
helpfulness.
though the knowledge of these objects be commendable
for their contentation and curiosity, yet they do not commend
their knowledge to us, upon the account of their usefulness
and beneficialiss. hale.
benefi’ciary. adj. [from benefice.] holding something in sub-
ordination to another; having a dependent and secondary pos-
session, without sovereign power.
the duke of parma was tempted by no less promise, than
to be made a feudatory, or beneficiary king of england, under
the seignery in chief of the pope. bacon.
benefi’ciary. m. s. he that is in possession of a benefice.
a benefice is either said to be a benefice with the cure of
souls, or otherwise. in the first case, if it be annexed to an-
other benefice, the beneficiary is obliged to serve the parish
church in his own proper person. a / so.
betnefit, n. s. [benefilium, lat.]
i. a kindness; a favour conferred; an ad of love.
when noble benefits shall prove
not well dispos'd, the mind grown once corrupt,
they turn to vicious forms. shakosheare.
bless the lord, o my soul, and forget not all his benefits. p.
offer'd life
negle&amp;t not, and the benefit embrace
by faith, not void of works. a solo.
2. advantage; profit; use.
the creature abateth his strength for the bonfit of such as
put their trust in thee. // jazm.
3. in law.
bergfit of clergy is an ancient liberty of the church, when a
priest, or one within orders, is arraigned of felony before a se-
cular judge, he may pray his clergy; that is, pray to be deli-
vered to his ordinary, to purge himself of the offence objected
to him : and this might be done in case of murder. the an-
cient law, in this point of clergy, is much altered; for clerks
are no more delivered to their ordinaries to be purged, but
now every man, though not within orders, is put to read at
the bar, being found guilty, and convicted of such felony as
this benefit is granted for; and so burnt in the hand, and set
free for the first time, if the ordinary's commissioner, or depu-
ty, standing by, do say, logit ut clericas; or, otherwise, sus-
fereth death for his transgression. czz, el.
to benefit. v. a. [from the noun..] to do good to ; to ad-
vantage.
what course i mean to hold,
shall nothing benefit your knowledge. shakespeare.
he was so far from benefiting trade, that he did it a great in-
jury, and brought rome in danger of a famine. a but not.
to benefit. v. n. to gain advantage; to make improve-
ment.
to tell you therefore what i have benefited herein, among
old renowned authors, i shall spare. a1 ston.
benempt. adj. [see nempt.] named ; marked out: an
obsolete word.
much greater gifts for guerdon thou shalt gain,
than kid or coffet, which i thee benempt;
then up, i say. speoser.
to benet. v. a. [from net.] to ensnare ; to surround as with
toils.
being thus benetted round with villains,
fre i could mark the prologue, to my bane
they had begun the play.
ben evo len ce. n.s.. [benevolentia, lat.]
1. disposition to do good ; kindness; charity; good will.
grasp the whole worlds of reason, life, and sense,
in one close system of benevolence. pope.
2. the good done; the charity given. *
3. a kind of tax.
this tax, called a benevolence, was devised by fdward iv.
for which he sustained much envy. it was abolished by
richard iii bacari.
ben evol. ent. adj. [benevolens, benevolentia, lat.] kind; hav-
ing good will, or kind inclinations.
*
skakoare:
thou good old man, benevolent as wise. pose.
nature all
is blooming and benevol nt like thee. 77 conson.
ben evol entn ess. m. s. the same with benevolence.
ben ga 1., m s, [from bengal in the east indies.] a sort of thin
slight stuff, made of silk and hair, for women's apparel.
be'n jamin. m. s. a plant.
be'n jam 1 n. m. s. a gum. see benzoi n.
to benight. v. a. [from night.]
1. to involve in darkness; to darken; to shrowd with th:
shades of night.
he that has light within his own clear breast
may fit i' th' center, and enjoy bright day;
but he that hides a dark soul, and foul thoughts,
benighted walks under the mid-day sun;
himself is his own dungeon. milton.
those bright stars that did adorn our hemisphere, as those
dark shades that did benight it, vanish. boyle.
a storm begins, the raging waves run high,
the clouds look heavy, and benight the sky. garth.
the miserable race of men, that live
benighted half the year, benumm'd with frosts
under the polar bear. philips.
2. to surprise with the coming on of night.
being benighted, the fight of a candle i saw a good way off,
directed me to a young shepherd's house. sidney.
here some benighted angel, in his way,
might ease his wings; and, seeing heav'n appear
in its best work of mercy, think it there. dryden.
3. to debar from intelle&amp;ual light; to cloud with ignorance.
- but
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 247</div><p class="text">b e n
b e q_
*.
o
o
but what so long in vain, and yet unknown
by poor mankind's benighted wit, is sought,
shall in this age to britain first be shown. dryden.
benign. adj. [benignus, lat. it is pronounced without the g,
as if written benine ; but the g is preserved in benignity.]
1. kind; generous; liberal; actually good. see benefic ent.
this turn hath made amends ! thou hast fulfill’d
thy words, creator bounteous and benign /
giver of all things fair. . milton.
so shall the world go on,
to good malignant, to bad men benign. milton.
we owe more to heav'n than to the sword,
the wish’d return of so benign a lord. j/aller.
what heav'n beitows upon the earth, in kind influences
and benign aspects, is paid it back in sacrifice and adoration.
south.
they who delight in the suffering of inferiour creatures,
will not be very compassionate or benign. locke.
diff'rent are thy names,
as thy kind hand has founded many cities,
or dealt benign thy various gifts to men. prizr.
2. wholesome ; not malignant.
these salts are of a benign mild nature, in healthy persons ;
but, in others, retain their original qualities, which they dis-
cover in cachexes. arbuthnot.
benign disease, is when all the usual symptoms appear in the
small-pox, or any acute disease, favourably, and without any
irregularities, or unexpected changes. 24incy.
benignity.. n. s. [from benign.]
1. graciousness; goodness.
it is true, that his mercy will forgive offenders, or his benig-
nity co-operate to their conversions. brown.
although he enjoys the good that is done him, he is uncon-
cerned to value the benignity of him that does it. south.
2. actual kindness.
he which useth the benefit of any special benignity, may en-
joy it with good conscience. hooker.
the king was desirous to establish peace rather by benignity
than blood. hayward.
3. salubrity; wholesome quality; friendliness to vital nature.
bones receive a quicker agglutination in sanguine than in
cholerick bodies, by reason of the benignity of the serum, which
fendeth out better matter for a callus. // seman.
benignly. adv. [from benign.] favourably ; kindly; gra-
ciously.
'tis amazement more than love,
which her radiant eyes do move ;
if less splendour wait on thine,
yet they so benignly shine,
i would turn my dazled sight
to behold their milder light. waller.
oh truly good, and truly great!
for glorious as he rose, benignly so he set. prior.
be'niso n., n.s.. [benir, to bless; benisons, fr.] blessing; be-
nediction : not now used, unless ludicrously.
we have no such daughter; nor shall ever see
that face of hers again ; therefore, begone
without our grace, our love, our benison. shakes care.
unmuffle, ye fair stars, and thou, fair moon,
that wont it to love the traveller's benison.
be's net. n. s. an herb ; the same with avens.
bent. n.s. [from the verb to bend.]
1. the state of being bent; a state of flexure; curvity.
strike gently, and hold your rod at a bent a little. j/alton.
2. degree of flexure.
there are divers subtle inquiries concerning the strength re-
quired to the bending of bows ; the force they have in the dis-
charge, according to the several lents; and the strength requir-
ed to be in the string of them. j/ilkins.
3. declivity.
a mountain stood,
threat’ning from high, and overlook'd the wood:
beneath the low'ring brow, and on a bent,
the temple stood of mars armipotent.
4. utmost power, as of a bent bow.
then let thy love be younger than thyself,
or thy affection cannot hold the bent.
we both obey,
and here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
to lay our service freely at your feet. shakespeare.
5. application of the mind; strain of the mental powers.
the understanding should be brought to the knotty parts of
knowledge, that try the strength of thought, and a full bent of
the mind, by insensible degrees. locke.
6. inclination ; disposition towards something.
o who does know the bent of womens fantasy spensor.
to your own bents dispose you; you'll be found
be you beneath the sky. - shakes care.
he knew the strong bent of the country towards the house of
york. bacon.
dryden.
shakespeare.
soon inclin'd to admit delight,
the bint of nature milton.
milton. .
the golden age was first ; when man, yet new,
no rule but uncorrupted reason knew ;
and, with a native bent, did good pursue. d, , " ".
let there be propensity and bent of will to religion, and
there will be the same sedulity and indefatigable industry. south.
'tis odds but the scale turns at last on nature's side, and the
evidence of one or two senses gives way to the united bent and
tendency of all the five. 4. terluy.
. determination ; fixed purpose.
their unbelief we may not impute unto insufficiency in the
mean which is used, but to the wilful bent of their obstinate
hearts against it. hooter.
yet we saw them forced to give way to the lent, and current
humour of the people, in favour of their ancient and lawful
government. tomsk.
8. turn of the temper, or disposition; shape, or fashion, super-
induced by art.
7
not a courtier,
although they wear their faces to the bent
of the king's look, but hath a heart that is
glad at the thing they scoul at. shake jar.
two of them have the very bent of honour. swoso.
then thy streight rule set virtue in my fight,
the crooked line reforming by the right;
my reason took the bent of thy command,
was form'd and polish’d by the skilful hand. dryden.
9. tendency ; flexion ; particular direction.
the exercising the understanding, in the several ways of
reasoning, teacheth the mind suppleness, to apply itself more
dexterously to bents and turns of the matter, in all its researches.
locke.
10. a stalk of grass, called lent-gross.
his spear, a bent both stiff and strong,
and well near of two inches long;
the pile was of a horse-fly's tongue,
whose sharpness naught reversed. drayt. nonol.
then the flowers of the vines; it is a little dust, like the
dust of a bent, which grows upon the cluster, in the first com-
ing forth. bacon's hoys.
june is drawn in a mantle of dark grass-green, upon his
head a garland of bents, kingcups, and maidenhair. a cassam.
benting time. [from bent...] the time when pigeons feed on
bents before peas are ripe. -
bare lonting times, and moulting months, may come,
when, lagging late, they cannot reach their home. dryd.
to benu'm. v. a. [benumen, saxon.] -
1. to make torpid; to take away the sensation and use of any
part by cold, or by some obstruction.
so stings a snake that to the fire is brought,
which harmless lay with cold benumm’d before. fairfax.
the winds blow meist and keen, which bids us seek
some better shroud, some better warmth, to cherish -
our limbs benumm'd. 41 ton.
my finews slaken, and an icy stiffness
benuns my blood. penham.
it seizes upon the vitals, and benums the senses; and where
there is no sense, there can be no pain. south.
will they be the less dangerous, when warmth shall brin,
them to themselves, because they were once frozen and ten...:
med with cold : 4.4/irange.
2. to stupify. •
these accents were her last: the creeping death
benumm'd her senses first, then stopp'd her breath. dryden.
benzo'in. m. s. a medicinal kind of resin imported from the
east indies, and vulgarly called benjamin. it is procured by
making an incision in a tree, whose leaves resemble those of
the lemon tree. the best comes from siam, and is called
amygdaloides, being interspersed with white spots, resembling
broken almonds. 7;evoix. chamir.
the liquor we have distilled from benzoin, is subject to fre-
quent vicisiitudes of fluidity and firmness. boyle.
benzoi n tree. see benjamin tree. -
to be pa int. v. a. [from paint.] to cover with paint.
thou know'st, the mask of night is on my face,
else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek. shakespeare.
to bepi(nch. v. a. [from pinch..] to mark with pinches.
in their sides, arms, shoulders, all bepincht,
ran thick the weals, red with blood, ready to start out.
- chapman.
to be p1’ss. v. a. [from piss.] to wet with urine.
one caused, at a feast, a bagpipe to be played, which made
the knight bepiss himself, to the great diversion of all then pre-
sent, as well as confusion of himself. derham.
to bequeath. v. a. [cribe, sax. a will.] to leave by will
to another.
she had never been disinherited of that goodly portion,
which nature had so liberally bequeathed to her. sidney.
let's choose executors, and talk of wills;
and yet not so—for what can we bequeath,
save our deposed bodies to the ground 3 shakespeare.
my father begurath'd me by will but a poor thousand crowns.
shakespeare.
methinks
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 248</div><p class="text">b e r
b e s
methinks this age seems resolved to bequeath posterity some-
what to remenber it. glanville.
for you, whom best i love and value most,
but to vour service i bequeath my ghost. dryden's fables.
beque'athment. m. s. [from bequeath.] . a legacy. dics.
beque’s t. n.s...[from bequeath j.s mething left by will; a legacy.
he claimed the crown to himself; pretending an adoption,
or bequest, of the kingdom unto him by the confessor. hale.
t, berattle. v. a. [from rattle.] to rattle off; to make
a noise at in contempt.
these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages,
so they call them, that many wearing rapiers are afraid of
oosequills, and dare scarce come thither. shakespeare.
bore erry. m. s. [herberis, sometimes written barberry, which
see..] a berry or a sharp taste, used for pickles.
some never ripen to be sweet, as tamarinds, berberries, crabs,
sloes, &amp;c. bacon's natural history.
7, bereave. v. n. preter. i bereaved, or bereft, part, bereft.
[beneoplan, saxon.]
r. to strip of ; to depive of. it has generally the particle of
before the thing taken away.
madam, you have berest me of all words,
only my blood speaks to you in my veins. shaftspeare.
that when thou com’s to kneel at henry's feet,
thou may’s bereave him of his wits with wonder. shakes.
there was never a prince bereaved of his dependencies by
his council, except there hath been an overgreatness in one
counsellor. bacon's essays.
the sacred priests with ready knives bereave
the beasts of life. dryden.
to deprive us of metals, is to make us mere savages; it is
to bereave us of all arts and sciences, of history and letters,
nay of revealed religion too, that incshimable favour of
heaven. bently's sermons.
2. sometimes it is used without of
bereave me not
whereon i live thy gentle looks, thy aid,
thy counsel, in this uttermost distress. milton.
3. to take away from.
all your interest in those territories
is utterly loroft you, all is lost. shakespeare.
bere"a v ement. m. s. [from berrave..] deprivation. dicf.
bereft. part. poss of bereave.
the chief of either side, berest of life,
or viele d to the foe, concludes the strife. dryden.
berg. see burrow.
be rga mot. n. j. [bergamotte, fr. j .
1. a sort of pear, commonly called burgamot. see pear.
2. a sort of essence, or perfume, drawn from a fruit produced by
ingrafting a lemon tree on a bergamot pear stock.
3. a sort of snuff, which is only clean tobacco, with a little of
the essence rubbed into it.
be’rcmaster. n. s. [from berg, sax. and master.] the bai-
liff, or chief officer, among the derbyshire miners.
be’rg mote. m. s. [of bera, a mountain, and more, a meeting,
saxon.] a court held upon a hill for deciding controversies
among the derbyshire miners. blount.
to ber hyme. v. a. [from rhyme.] to mention in rhyme, or
verses : a word of contempt.
now is he for the numbers that petrarch flow’d in : laura to
his lady was but a kitchen wench ; marry, she had a better
love to berhyme her. shakespeare.
i sought no homage from the race that write;
i kept, like asian monarchs, from their fight:
poems i heeded, now berhym'd so long,
no more than thou, great george' a birthday song. pope.
berli'n. n s, [from berlin, the city where they were first made.]
a coach of a particular form.
beware of latin authors all !
nor think your verses sterling,
though with a golden pen you scrawl,
and scribble in a berlin. swift.
berme. m. s. [fr. in fortification.] a space of ground three,
four, or five feet wide, left without between the foot of the
rampart and the side of the mote, to prevent the earth from
falling down into the mote ; sometimes palisadoed. harris.
to bero b. v. a. [from rob.] to rob ; to plunder; to wrong
any, by taking away something from him by stealth or vio-
lence. not used. -
she said, ah dearest lord ' what evil star
on you hath frown'd, and pour’d his influence bad,
that of yourself you thus ber:bled are. fairy queen.
betry. m. s. [benig, sax. from benan, to bear.] any small
fruit, with many seeds or small stones.
she smote the ground, the which straight forth did yield
a fruitful olive tree, with berries spread,
that all the gods admir’d. spensor.
the strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
and wholesome berries thrive and ripen best,
neighbour’d by fruit of basest quality. shakespeare.
to berry. v. n. [from the noun..] to bear berries.
berry-bearing cedar. [.cedrus baccifera, lat.] the leaves
are squamose, somewhat like those of the cypress. the kat-
kins, or male flowers, are produced at remote distances from
the fruit on the same tree. the fruit is a berry, inclosing
three hard seeds in each. the wood is of great use in the
levant, is large timber, and may be thought the shittim-wood
mentioned in the scripture, of which many of the ornaments
to the famous temple of solomon were made. a miller.
be’rry-bearing orach. see mulbe rry blight.
bert, is the same with our bright; in the latin, illusori; and
clarus. so ecbert, eternally famous, or bright ; sigbert, famous
conqueroar. and she who was termed by the germans bertha,
was by the greeks called eudoxia, as is observed by lint-
prandus. of the same sort were these, phaedrus, epiphanius, pho-
tous, lampridius, fugentius, illustris. gibson's camden.
bert h. n.s.. [with sailors.] see birth.
be'rtram. m. s. spyrethrum, lat..] a sort of herb, called also
ba/lard pellitory.
be’ry l. m. s. [beryllus, lat.] a kind of precious stone.
may the billows roul ashore
the beryl and the golden ore. milton.
the bery! of our lapidaries is only a fine sort of cornelian
of a more deep bright red, sometimes with a cast of yellow,
and more transparent than the common cornelian. //codw.
to besco e'en. v. a. [from screen.] to cover with a screen;
to shelter ; to conceal.
what man art thou, that thus lostreem'd in night,
so stumblest on my counsel ! shakesheare.
to bese's ch. v. a. pret. i bisought, i have besought. [fron re-
can, sax. vesseeken, dutch..]
1. to intreat ; to supplicate ; to implore; sometimes before a
person.
i beseech you, sir, pardon me; it is only a letter from my
brother, that i have not all over-read. shakespeare.
i beseech thee for my son onesmus, whom i have begotten
in my bonds. philimon, 10.
i, in the anguish of my heart, beseech you
to quit the dreadful purpose of your soul. 4.d.s.n.
2. to beg; to ask ; before a thing.
but eve fell humble, and bosought
his peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint. milton.
before i came to them, i beftech your patience, whilst i
speak something to ourselves here present. spratt.
to bese em. v. n. [beziemen, dutch..] to become; to be fit;
to be decent for.
what form of speech, or behaviour, besiemoth us in our
prayers to almighty god? hooker.
this oversight
bostoms thee not, in whom such virtues spring. fairfax.
verona's ancient citizens
cast by their brave beseeming ornaments. shakespeare.
what thoughts he had, beseems not me to say;
though some surmize he went to fast and pray. dryden.
bese en. particip. [from besie, skinner. this word i have only
found in spensor.] adapted ; adjusted ; becoming.
forth came that ancient lord and aged queen,
armed in antique robes down to the ground,
and sad habiliments, right well beseen. fairy queen.
to bes e^t. v. a. pret. i beset ; i have best. [berizcan, sax.]
1. to besiege ; to hem in ; to inclose ; as with a siege.
follow him that's fled ;
the thicket is best, he cannot 'scape. shakespeare-
now, caesar, let thy troops beset our gates,
and bar each avenue
cato shall open to himself a passage. adon-
i know thou look'st on me, as on a wretch
beset with ills and cover'd with misfortunes. adaon.
2. to waylay; to surround.
draw forth thy weapon, we're best with thieves ;
rescue thy mistress. shakes?eare.
the only righteous in a world perverse,
and therefore hated, therefore so best
with foes, for daring fingle to be just. milton.
true fortitude i take to be the quict possession of a man's self,
and an undisturbed doing his duty, whatever evil bosets, or
danger lies in his way. locke.
3. to embarrass; to perplex; to entangle without any means
of escape.
now, daughter sylvia, you are hard bost. shakesheare.
thus adam, sore beset, reply'd. 44ilton.
sure, or i read her visage much amiss,
rowe.
or grief besets her hard.
we be in this world beset with fundry uneasinesses, distrasted
with different desires. locke-
4. to fall upon; to harass. not used.
but they him spying, both with greedy force
at once upon him ran, and him beset
with strokes of mortal steel. fairy queen.
to beshrew. v. a. [the original of this word is somewhat ob.
scure; as it evidently implies to wish ill, some derive it from
heschryen, germ. to enchant. topfel, in his book of animals,
deduces it from the shrew moose, an animal, says he, so poiso-
nous, that its bite is a severe curse. a shrew likewise signifies
a scolding woman ; but its origin is not known.]
1. to wish a curse to.
6 nay,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 249</div><p class="text">b e s
b e s
:
:
!
:
o
:
.
st
.
p. es 1 de.
£es 1 des.
nay, quoth the cock; but i besirew us both, -
if i beiieve a saint upon his oath. dryden's falles.
2. to happen ill to.
b /or w thee, cousin, which did'st lead me forth
of that sweet way i was in to despair. shakespeare.
now much beshrew my manners, and my pride,
if hermia meant to say lysander lied. shakoshcare.
! prep. [from be and side.]
1. at the side of another; near.
bosile the hearse a fruitful palmtree grows,
frnobled since by this great funeral. fairfax.
he caused me to sit down boside him. bacon.
at his right hand, victory
sat eagle wing'd : beside him hung his bow. milton.
fair lavinia fled the fire
before the gods, and flood beside her fire. dryden.
fair is the kingcup that in meadow blows;
fair is the daisy that leside her grows. gay.
now under hanging mountains,
beside the falls of fountains,
unheard, unknown,
he makes his moan. pope.
2. over and above.
doubtless, in man there is a nature found,
bos; 'e the senses, and above them far. sir j. davies.
in brutes, besides the exercise of sensitive perception and
imagination, there are lodged instincts antecedent to their ima-
ginative faculty. hale.
we may be sure there were great numbers of wise and
learned men, beside those whose names are in the christian re-
cords, who took care to examine our saviour’s history.
addison on the christian religion.
precepts of morality, besides the natural corruption of our
tempers, are abstracted from ideas of sense. addison.
3. not according to, though not contrary; as we say, some
things are beside nature, some are contrary to nature.
the stoicks did hold a necessary connexion of causes; but
they believed, that god doth act practer &amp; contra naturam, be-
sides and against nature. bramhall.
to say a thing is a chance, as it relates to second causes, fig-
nifies no more, than that there are some events beside the know-
ledge, purpose, expectation, and power of second causes. south.
providence often disposes of things by a method beside, and
above the discoveries of man's reason. south.
it is beside my present business to enlarge upon this specula-
tion. locke.
4. out of ; in a state of deviating from.
you are too wilful blame,
and, since your coming here, have done
enough to put him quite beside his patience. shakesp.
of vagabonds we say,
that they are ne'er beside their way. hudibras.
these may serve as landmarks, to shew what lies in the di-
rect way of truth, or is quite besides it. locke.
5. before a reciprocal pronoun, out of ; as, beside himself; out of
the order of rational beings ; out of his wits.
they be carried besides themselves, to whom the dignity of
publick prayer doth not discover somewhat more fitness in men
of gravity, than in children. hooker.
only be patient, till we have appeas'd
the multitude, beside themselves with fear. shakesheare.
festus said with a loud voice, paul, thou art beside thys.sf.
much learning doth make thee mad. acts.
beside. d
be31 des, ! ad v.
1. more than that ; over and above.
if casio do remain,
he hath a daily beauty in his life,
that makes me ugly ; and, besides, the moor
may unfold me to him ; there stand i in peril. shakesp.
byides, you know not, while you here attend,
th’ unworthy fate of your unhappy friend. dryden.
"that man that doth not know those things, which are of
necessity for him to know, is but an ignorant man, whatever he
may know besides. tillotson.
some wonder, that the turk never attacks this treasury.
but, besides that he has attempted it formerly with no success,
it is certain the venetians keep too watchful an eye. addison.
2. not in this number; out of this class; not included here.
the men said unto lot, haft thou here any besides p
geness.
outlaws and robbers, who break with all the world besides,
must keep faith among themseves. locke.
all that we feel of it, begins and ends
in the small circle of our foes or friends;
to all beside as much an empty shade,
an eugene living, as a caesar dead.
and dead, as living, 'tis our author's pride
still to charm those who charm the world beside.
bes1’dery. m. s. a species of pear.
to bes 1’e ge. v. a. [from siege.] to beleaguer; to lay fiege to ;
to beset with armed forces; to endeavour to win a town or
vol. i.
pope.
pope.
fortress, by surrounding it with an army, and forcing the de-
fendants, either by violence or famine, to give admission.
and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and
fenced walls come down. • deuteronomy.
the queen, with all the northern earls and lords,
intend here to bosiege you in your castle. shakespeare.
besi'eger. m. s. [from besiege.] one employed in a fiege.
there is hardly a town taken, in the common forms, where
the besiegers have not the worse of the bargain. swift.
to beslu'bber. v. a. [from slubber.] to dawb to smear.
he persuaded us to tickie our noses with speargrass, and
make them bleed; and then boslumber our garments with it,
and swear it was the blood of true men. shakespeare.
to bf sm e. a r. v. a. [from smear.]
1. to bedaub ; to overspread with something that sticks on.
he lay as in a dream of deep delight,
besmear'd with precious balm, whose virtuous might
did heal his wounds.
that face of his i do remember well;
yet when i saw it last, it was besmear'd
as black as vulcan. shakespeare.
first moloch horrid king ! besmear'd with blood
of human sacrifice, and parents tears. paradise lost.
her fainting hand let fall the sword, bosnear'd
with blood. denham.
her gushing blood the pavement all bosoncar'd. dryden.
2. to soil; to foul.
my honour would not let ingratitude
so much besmear it. shakespeare.
to besmi'rch. v. a. to soil; to discolour. not in use.
perhaps he loves you now,
and now no soil of cautel doth besmirch
the virtue of his will. shakespeare.
our gayness, and our gilt are all besmirch'd
with rainy marching in the painful field. shakespeare.
to besmo‘ke. v. n. [from smoke.]
1. to foul with smoke.
2. to harden or dry in smoke.
to beswiu't. v. a. [from smut.] to blacken with smoke or soot.
be’so m. m. s. [berm, berma, sax.] an instrument to sweep
with.
bacon commended an old man that sold bosoms: a proud
young fellow came to him for a bosom upon trust; the old man
- - - -
fairy queen.
-
said, borrow of thy back and belly, they will never ask thee -
again; i shall dun thee every day. bacon.
i will sweep it with the bosom of destruction, faith the lord
of hosts. -
to besos rt. v. a. [from sort.] to suit; to fit; to become.
such men as may befort your age,
and know themselves and you. shakespeare.
beso'rt. m. s. [from the verb.] company; attendance; train.
i crave fit disposition for my wife,
with such accommodation and bosort,
as levels with her breeding.
to bes'ot, v. a. [from sot.]
i. to infatuate; to stupify; to dull; to take away the senses.
* soft, gluttony -
ne'er looks to heav'n amidst his gorgeous feast,
but, with bosotted base ingratitude,
sha a.(spear*.
crams and blasphemes his feeder. milton.
or fools besotted with their crimes,
that know not how to shift betimes. hudibras.
he is besotted, and has lost his reason; and what then can
there be for religion to take hold of him by ? south.
2. to make to doat, with on. not much used.
paris, you speak
like one besotted on your sweet delights.
trust not thy beauty; but restore the prize,
which he, besotted on that face and eyes,
would rend from us.
beso"ught. [part, passive of beseech; which sce.]
hasten to appease
th’ incensed father, and th’ incensed son,
while pardon may be found, in time besought. milton.
to bespa'ngle. v. a. [from spangle.] to adorn with span-
gles ; to hesprinkle with something shining.
not berenice's locks first rose so bright,
the heav'ns bespangling with dishevell d light. pope.
to bespa'tter. v. a. [from spatter j. to soil by throwing
filth ; to spot or sprinkle with dirt or water. -
those who will not take vice into their bosoms, shall yet
have it bespatter their faces. government of the tongur.
his weapons are the same which women and children use;
shakspeare.
dryden.
a pin to scratch, and a squirt to leshatter. swift.
fair britain, in the monarch blest,
whom never faction could hospatter. swift.
to bespawl. v. a. [from spawl.] to dawb with spittle.
to bespe’ak. v. a. bespoke, or bespake; i have bespoke, or be-
fpoken. [from speak.]
1. to order, or entreat anything beforehand, or against a fu-
ture tinie.
if you will marry, make your loves to me;
my lady is bospoke. shakop are.
3 a here
isaiah, xiv. 22. '
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 250</div><p class="text">b e s
b e s
here is the cap your worship did bespeak. shakesp.
when baboon came to strutt's estate, his tradesmen waited
upon him to bespeak his custom. - arbuthnot.
a heavy writer was to be encouraged, and accordingly many
thousand copies were bespoke. swift.
2. to make way by a previous apology.
my preface looks as if i were afraid of my reader, by so fe-
dious a bespeaking of him. dryden.
3. to forbode; to tell something before hand. -
they started fears, bespoke dangers, and formed ominous
prognosticks, in order to scare the allies. swift.
4. to speak to ; to address. this sense is chiefly poetical.
with hearty words her knight she 'gan to chear,
and, in her modest manner, thus bespake,
dear knight. fairy queen.
at length with indignation thus he broke
his awful silence, and the powers bespoke. dryden.
then staring on her with a ghastly look,
and hollow voice, he thus the queen bespoke.
5. to betoken ; to shew.
when the abbot of st. martin was born, he had so little of
the figure of a man, that it bespoke him rather a monster. locke.
he has dispatch'd me hence,
with orders that bespeak a mind compos'd. addison.
bespe’aker. m. s. [from bespeak.] he that bespeaks any
thing.
they mean not with love to the bespeaker of the work, but
delight in the work itself. //otton.
to bespeckle. v. a. [from speckle.] to mark with speckles, or
spots.
72 flow. v. a. [from spew.] to dawb with spew or vomit.
to besp1(ce. v. a. [from spice.j. to season with spices.
thou might'st bespice a cup
to give mine enemy a lasting wink. shakespeare.
to bespior. v. a. i bespat, or bospit; i have bespit, or bospitten.
[from spit.] to dawb with spittle.
bespooke. [irreg. particip. from bespeak; which see.]
to bespo t. v. a. [from spot.] to mark with spots.
mildew rests on the wheat, bospotting the stalks with a dif-
ferent colour from the natural. mortimer.
to bespread. v. a. preter. bespread; part. pass. bosoread. [from
spread..] to spread over; to cover over.
his nuptial bed,
with curious needles wrought, and painted flowers les?read.
dryden.
the globe is equally bespread; so that no place wants proper
inhabitants. derham.
to bespri'nkle. v. a. [from sprinkle.] to sprinkle over ; to
scatter over.
herodotus imitating the father poet, whose life he had writ-
dryden.
ten, hath besprinkled his work with many fabulositics. brown.
a purple flood
flows from the trunk, that welters in the blood :
the bed besprinkles, and bedevs the ground. dryden.
to besputt er. v. a. [from sputter.] to sputter over some-
thing; to dawb any thing by sputtering, or throwing out spit-
tle upon it.
best. adj. the superlative from good. [bet, bezena, betrz, good,
better, best, saxon.]
1. most good; that which has good qualities in the highest de-
orce.
§ and he will take your fields, even the best of them, and give
them to his servants. i samuel, viii. 14.
when the best things are not possible, the left may be made
of those that are. hooker.
when he is bes?, he is little more than a man; and when
he is worst, he is little better than a beast. shakesp.
i think it a good argument to say, the infinitely wise god
hath made it so : and therefore it is bes?. but it is too much
confidence of our own wisdom, to say, i think it best, and
therefore god hath made it so. locke.
an evil intention perverts the best actions, and makes them
sins. addison.
2. the best. the utmost power; the strongest endeavour; the
most ; the highest perfection.
i profess not talking : only this,
let each man do his beft. shakespeare.
the duke did his beft to come down. bacon.
he does this to the best of his power. locke.
my friend, said he, our sport is at the bes?. . addison.
3. to make the best. to carry to its greatest perfeotion; toim-
prove to the utmost.
let there be freedom to carry their commodities where
they may make the best of them, except there be some special
sause of caution. bacon.
his father left him an hundred drachmas; alnaschar, in or-
der to make the best of it, laid it out in glasses. addison.
we set sail, and made the best of our way, till we were
forced, by contrary winds, into st. remo. addison.
best. adv. |. well.] in the highest degree of goodness.
we shall dwell in that place where he shall choose in one of
thy gates, where it liketh them beft.
best is sometimes used in composition.
deut.
these latter best-be trust spies had some of them further in-
structions, to draw off the best friends and servants of perkin,
by making remonstrances to them, how weakly his enterprize
and hopes were built. &amp; coole
by this law of loving even our enemies, the christian religion
discovers itself to be the most generous and besinatured institu-
tion that ever was in the world. tillotson.
to besta'in. v. a. [from slain.] to mark with stains; to
t.
we will not line his thin beftained cloke
with our pure honours. shakespears.
to beste ad. v. a. i besied ; i have bossed. [from/lead j
i. to profit.
hence vain deluding joys,
the brood of folly, without father bred,
how little you besiead,
or fill the fixed mind with all your toys. amilton.
2. to treat ; to accommodate. this should rather be besied.
they shall pass through it hardly bylead, and hungry. isaiah.
be'stial. adj. [from beds.]
1. belonging to a beast, or to the class of beasts.
his wild disorder'd walk, his haggard eyes,
did all the bestial citizens surprize. dryden.
2. having the qualities of beasts; brutal; below the dignity of
reason or humanity; carnal.
i have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains
is besłial. shakespeare's othelio.
moreover, urge his hateful luxury,
and be/lial appetite, in change of lust. shakspeare.
for those, the race of israel oft forsook
their living strength, and, unfrequented, left
his righteous altar, bowing lowly down
to be/?ial gods. azilton.
the things promised are not gross and carnal, such as may
court and gratify the most beftial part of us. decay of piety.
bestia'lity. m. s. [from beftial.] the quality of beasts; de-
generacy from human nature.
what can be a greater absurdity, than to affirm bosiality to
be the essence of humanity, and darkness the center of light?
arbuthnot and pope's mart. scribs.
be's tially. adv, [from bosłial.] brutally; in a manner be-
low humanity.
ta best1'ck. v. a. preter. i bosluck, i have bestuck. [from sick.]
to stick over with any thing; to mark any thing by infixing
points or spots here and there.
truth shall retire,
besluck with sland’rous darts; and works of faith
rarely to be found.
to best1'r. v. a. [from soir.]
1. to put into vigorous action. it is seldom used otherwise than
with the reciprocal pronoun.
as when men wont to watch
on duty, sleeping found by whom they dread,
rouze and bestir themselves ere well awake.
bostirs her then, and from each tender stalk
whatever earth, all-bearing mother, yields,
she gathers.
but, as a dog that turns the spit,
boslins himself, and plies his feet
to climb the wheel, but all in vain,
his own weight brings him down again. hudibras.
what aileth them, that they must needs beftir themselves to
get in air, to maintain the creature's life? ray.
2. it is used by shakespeare with a common word.
i am scarce in breath, my lord.—no marvel you have so
bestirred your valour, you cowardly rascal shakesp.
to bestow. v. a. sigsleden, dutch.]
1. to give; to confer upon : commonly with upon.
all men would willingly have yielded him praise; but his
nature was such as to be/low it upon himself, before - ny could
ive it. sidney.
all the dedicate things of the house of the lord, did they
bestow upon baalim. 2 chron. xxiv. 7.
2. sometimes with to.
sir julius caesar had, in his office, the disposition of the six
clarks places; which he had byłowed to such persons as he
thought fit. clarendon.
3. to give as charity or bounty.
our saviour doth plainly witness, that there should not be
as much as a cup of cold water byłowed for his sake, without
milton.
x *- :
zvz, it 27,
parads: loo.
reward. hocker.
and though he was unsatisfied in getting,
which was a sin; yet in bo/lowing, madam,
he was most princely. shakespeare.
spain to your gift alone her indies owes;
for what the pow'rful takes not, he bestows. dryden.
you always exceed expectations: as if yours was not
your own, but to bestow on wanting merit. dryden.
4. to give in marriage.
good rev'rend father, make my person yours;
and tell me how you would bestow yourself. shak's care.
i could have byłowed her upon a fine gentleman, who ex-
tremely admired her. tatler.
4. 5. to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 251</div><p class="text">b e t
b e t
o
==
&amp;-:
2. to step over.
5. to give as a present.
pure oil and incense on the fire they throw,
and fat of victims which his friends be/low. dryden.
6. to apply.
the sea was not the duke of marlborough's element;
otherwise the whole force of the war would infallibly have
been besłowed there. swift.
7. to lay out upon.
and thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul
lusteth after, for oxen, sheep, or for wine. deut. xiv. 26.
8. to lay up ; to stow ; to place.
and when he came to the tower, he took them from their
hand, and bestowed them in the house. 2 kings, v. 24.
bestow er. m. s. [from bestow.] giver; he that confers any
thing; disposer.
they all agree in making one supreme god; and that there
are several beings that are to be worshipped under him; some
as the bestowers of throncs, but subordinate to the supreme.
stillingfleet.
best ra"u ght. particip. [of this participle i have not found the
verb ; by analogy we may derive it from besirac: ; perhaps it is
corrupted from diffraught.] distracted; mad; out of one's
senses; out of one's wits.
ask marian, the fat alewife, if she knew me not. what
i am not beftraught. shakespeare.
to best re"w. v. a. particip, pass besirewed, or bosorown. [from
strew.] to sprinkle over.
so thick besirown,
abject and lost lay these, covering the flood. milton.
to bestri'd e. v. a. i bes?rid; i have bestrid, or besiridden. [from
ride.]
i :#. stride over any thing; to have any thing between one's legs.
why, man, he doth bosi, ide the narrow world
like a colossus. shakespeare.
make him leftride the ocean, and mankind
ask his consent, to use the sea and wind. waller.
that i see thee here,
thou noble thing ! more dances my rapt heart,
than when i first my wedded mistress saw
besiride my threshold. shakespeare.
3. it is often used in the consequential sense for to ride on.
he besirides the lazy pacing clouds,
and sails upon the bosom of the air.
that horse, that thou so often hast besirid:
that horse, that i so carefully have dress'd. shakespeare.
venetians do not more uncouthly ride,
shakespeare.
than did their lubber state mankind beftride. dryden.
the bounding steed you pompously besiride,
shares with his lord the pleasure and the pride. pope.
4. it is used sometimes of a man standing over something which
he defends: the present mode of war has put this sense out
of use.
he besirid
an o'erpress'd roman, and i' th' consul’s view
slew three opposers : tarquin's self he met,
and struck him on his knee. - shakespeare.
if thou see me down in the battle and bosoride me, so ; ’tis
a point of friendship. shakespeare.
he doth beftride a bleeding land,
gasping for life, under great bolingbroke., , shakespeare.
t, bestu'd. v. a. [from stud.] to adorn with studs, or shin-
ing prominences.
th’ unsought diamonds
would so emblaze the forehead of the deep,
and so be/lad with stars, that they below
would grow inur'd to light. milton.
bet. n.s. [rebbian, to wager; feb, a wager, sax, from which
the etymologists derive bet. i should rather imagine it to come
from bezan, to mend, cncrease, or better, as a bet encreases the
original wager.) a wager; something laid to be won upon
certain conditions.
the hoary fool, who many days,
has struggl’d with continu'd sorrow,
renews his hope, and blindly lays
the desp'rate let upon to-morrow. prior.
his pride was in piquette,
newmarket fame, and judgment at a bet. pope.
to ber. v. a. [from the noun.j to wager ; to stake at a
wager.
#. drew a good bow: and dead john of gaunt loved
him well, and betted much upon his head. shakespeare.
he flies the court for want of clothes,
cries out 'gainst cocking, since he cannot bet. ben. johnson.
the god, unhappily engag’d,
complain'd, and figh'd, and cry’d, and fretted,
lost every earthly thing he betted. prior.
bet. the old preterite of beat.
he staid for a better hour, till the hammer had wrought
and bet the party more pliant. bacon.
to o v. a. preter. i betook ; part, pass betaken. [from
take.
1. to take ; to seize: an obsolete sense.
then to his hands that writ he did betake,
which he disclosing read. spensor.
2. to have recourse to : with the reciprocal pronoun.
the adverse party betaking itself to such practices as men
embrace, when they behold things brought to desperate ex-
tremitics. hooker.
thou tyrants
do not repent these things; for they are heavier
than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee
to nothing but despair. shakspeare.
the rest, in imitation, to like arms
betook them, and the neighbouring hills up tore. milton.
3. to apply: with the reciprocal pronoun.
with ease such fond chimeras we pursue,
as fancy frames for fancy to subdue :
but when ourselves to a. we betake,
it shuns the mint, like gold that chymists make. dryden:
as my observations have been the light whereby i have
steered my course, so i betake myself to them again. 1%dward.
4. to move; to remove.
soft she withdrew; and, like a wood nymph light,
oread or dryad, or of delia's train,
betook her to the groves. milton.
they both betook them several ways;
both to destroy. milton.
to bet e(em. v. a. [from teem.] to bring forth; to bestow ;
to give.
so would i, said th’ enchanter, glad and fain
beteem to you his sword, you to defend ;
but that this weapon's pow'r i well have kend,
to be contrary to the work that ye intend. fairy 21cen.
rain; which i could well
beteem them from the tempest of mine eyes. shaies.
to bethu'n k. v a. i bethought ; i have bethought, [from think. j
to recal to refle&amp;tion; to bring back to consideration, or re-
colle&amp;tion. it is generally used with the reciprocal pronoun,
and of before the subject of thought. -
they were sooner in danger than they could almost bothink
themselves of change. sidney.
i have bethought me of another fault. shakespeare.
i, better bethinking myself, and misliking his determination,
gave him this order. raleigh.
he himself,
insatiable of glory, had lost all:
yet of another plea bethought him soon. milton.
the nets were laid, yet the birds could never bethink them-
selves, till hamper'd, and past recovery. l'e/orange.
cherippus, then in time yourses bethink,
and what your rags will yield by auction sink. dryden.
a little consideration may allay his heat, and make him be-
think himself, whether this attempt be worth the venture. locke.
bethlehem. n.s. [see bedlam.] an hospital for lu-
naticks.
best hlehemite. m. s. [see bedlamite.] a lunatick; an
inhabitant of a madhouse.
bet hought. particip. [from bethink; which see.]
to beth ra'l. v. a. [from thrall.] to enslave; to conquer;
to bring into subjection.
ne let that wicked woman 'scape away,
for she it is that did my lord bethral. shakespeare.
to bethu'mp. v. a. [from thump.] to beat ; to lay blows
upon: a ludicrous word.
i was never so bethumpt with words,
since first i call'd my brother's father dad. shakoshcare.
to bet 1'de. v. m. pret. it betided, or betid; part, pass. letid.
[from tib, sax. . see tide.]
1. to happen to ; to befal; to bechance, whether good or
bad : with the person.
said he then to the palmer, reverend sire,
what great misfortune hath betid this knight spensor.
but say, if our deliverer up to heav'n
must reascend, what will betide the few,
his faithful, left among th' unfaithful herd,
the enemies of truth : milton,
2. sometimes it has to.
neither know i;
what is belid to cloten; but remain
perplext in all. shakespeare.
3. to come to pass; to fall out; to happen : without the
erson.
p she, when her turn was come her tale to tell,
told of a strange adventure that betided,
betwixt the fox and th’ ape by him misguided. spensor.
in winter's tedious nights, sit by the fire
with good old folks, and let then tell thee tales
of woful ages, long ago betid. shakespeare.
let me hear from thee by letters,
of thy success in love; and what news else
betideth here in absence of thy friend. shakespeare.
4. to become; to be the fate: with of:
if he were dead, what would betide of thee * shakes.
beth me,
</p></div><p>
            end of section 2.
          continue to next section or <a href="https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/ssd?id=osu.32435030881114#toc">go to table of contents</a></p></div><a name="section3" id="section3"></a><div class="section"><h3 class="sectionheading">section 3</h3><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 252</div><p class="text">b e t
b e t
beri'me. i adv. [from by and time; that is, by the proper
bet 1. mes. } time j
1. seasonably; early ; before it is late. -
send succours, lords, and stop the rage betime.
to measure life, learn thou b times, and know
toward solid good what leads the nearest way.
2. soon; before long time has passed.
whiles they are weak, betimes with them contend;
for when they once to perfect strength do grow,
strong wars they make. sponsor.
he tires fetimes, that spurs too fast betimes. shakespeare.
there be some have an over early ripeness in their years,
which fadeth betimes: these are first, such as have blittle wits,
the edge whereof is soon turned. bacon.
remember thy creator in the days of thy youth ; that is,
enter upon a religious course betimes. tillotson.
short is the date, alas! of modern rhymes:
and 'tis but just to let them live b. times. pope.
3. early in the day.
he that drinks all night, and is hanged batimes in the morn-
ing, may sleep the sounder next day. shakspeare.
they rose betimes in the morning, and offered sacrifice.
1 macc. iv. 52.
betle. y. n. s. [piper adulterinum.] an indian plant, called
betr e. ! water pepper. dick.
to beto'k en. v. a. [from token.]
1. to signify ; to mark ; to represent.
we know not wherefore churches should be the worse, if, at
this time, when they are delivered into god's own possession,
ceremonies fit to betaken such intents, and to accompany such
actions, be usual. hocker.
a dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow,
conspicuous with three litted colours gay,
betokening peace from god.
2. to foreshew; to presignify.
the kindling azure, and the mountain's brow,
illum'd with fluid gold, his near approach
betoken glad. thomson.
beton y. n.s.. [betonica, lat..] a plant, greatly esteen:ed as a
vulnerary herb. miller.
betook. [irreg. pret. from betake; which see.]
73 beto'ss. v. a. [from toss.] to disturb; to agitate ; to put
into violent motion.
what said my man, when my bit isd soul
did not attend him as we rode :
to betra(y. v. a. [trahir, fr.]
1. to give into the hands of enemies by treachery, or breach of
trust: with to before the person, otherwise into.
if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing there is
no wrong in mine hands, the god of our fathers look thereon,
and rebuke it. 1 chronicl, 5.
jesus said unto them, the son of man shall be betrayed into
the hands of men. a /atthew.
for fear is nothing else but a betraying of the succours which
reason offereth. // ison.
he was not to be won, either by promise or reward, to be-
tray the city. an:les.
2. to discover that which has been entrusted to secrecy.
3. to expose to evil by revealing something &amp;ntrusted.
how would'st thou again betray me,
bearing my words and doings to the lord! milton.
4. to make known something that were better concealed.
be swift to hear, but be cautious cf your tongue, lest you
betray your ignorance. // atts.
5. to make liable to fall into something inconvenient.
his abilities created him great confidence; and this was
like enough to betray him to great errours. king charles.
the bright genius is ready to be so forward, as often betrays
itself into great errours in judgment. // atts.
6. to show ; to discover.
- ire, envy, and despair,
which marr'd his borrow'd visage, and betray'd
him counterfeit, if any eye beheld.
the veian and the gabian tow’rs shall fall,
and one promiscuous ruin cover all;
nor, after length of years, a stone betray
the place where once the very ruins lay. addison.
betray er. n. s. [from betray.] he that betrays; a traitor.
the wise man doth so say of fear, that it is a betrayer of the
forces of reasonable understanding. hooker.
you cast down your courage through fear, the betrayer of
all succours which reason can afford. sir f. hayward.
they are only a few betrayers of their country; they are to
purchase coin, perhaps, at half price, and vend it among us
to the ruin of the publick. swift.
79 be tr1 m. v. a. [from trim.] to deck; to dress; to grace;
to adorn ; to embellish; to beautify; to decorate.
thy banks with pioned and twilled brims,
which spungy april at thy hest botrims,
to make cold nymphs chaste crowns. sha's care.
73 betro i h. v. a. [from truth; betrowen, dutch. j
shakesp.
al/ilton.
milton.
shakspeare.
milion.
1. to contrac to any one, in order to marriage; to affiance:
used either of men or women.
he, in the first flower of my freshest age,
betrothed me unto the only heir
of a most mighty king, most rich and sage. spensor.
to her, my lord,
was i betrathed, ere i hermia saw. shakosheare.
by soul's publick promise she -
was sold them, and betroth'd to victory. c. why.
2. to have as affianced by promise of marriage.
and what man is there that hath betrathed a wife, and hath
not taken her ? let him go and return into his house. deat.
3. to nominate to a bishoprick, in order to consecration.
if any person be consecrated a bishop to that church, whete-
unto he was not before betrothed, he shall not receive the ha oit
of consecration, as not being canonically promoted. a so.
to be tru'st. v. a. [from trust.] to entrust; to put i:1 to the
power cf another, in confidence of fidelity.
betrust him with all the good, which our own capacity wiłł
allow us, or his sufficiency encourage us to hope for, either
in this life, or that to come. gre:...
whatsoever you would betrus? to your memory, let it be
disposed in a proper method. // arts.
better. adj. the comparative of g.o.d. ster, good betena, better,
sax.] having good qualities in a greater degree than some-
thing else. see good.
he has a horse better than the neapolitan's; a better bad
habit of flowning than the count palatine.
shakespeare's marchant of penice.
i have seen botter faces in my time,
. than stand on any shoulders that i see
before me at this instant. shakes? -azz.
having a desire to depart, and be with christ; which is far
bott r. philipsia”.
the bett er.
1. the superiority; the advantage : with the particle of before
him, or that, over which the advantage is gained.
the corinthians that morning, as the days before, had the
better. sidr. j.
the voyage of drake and hawkins was unfortunate; yet,
in such fort, as doth not break our prescription, to have had
the better of the spaniards. bacon.
dionysius, his countryman, in an epistle to pompey, after
an express comparison, affords him the better of thucydides.
b, own’s walsar or sars.
you think fit
to get the better of me, and you shall;
since you will have it so—i will be yours. sawthorne.
the gentleman had always so much the better of the sayrist,
that the persons touched did not know where to fix their re-
sentment. prior.
2. improvement; as, for the better, so as to improve it.
if i have altered him any where for the better, i must at the
same time acknowledge, that i could have done nothing with–
out him. dryden.
bert e.r. adv. [comparative of well.] well, in a greater degree.
then it was better with me than now. hof-a-
better a mechanick rule were stretched or broken, than a
great beauty were omitted. drydon-
the better to understand the extent of our knowledge, ore
thing is to be observed. locke.
he that would know the idea of infinity, cannot do better,
than by considering to what infinity is attributed. 42-4e.
to better. v. a. [from the noun.j
1. to improve; to meliorate.
the cause of his taking upon him our nature, was to better
the quality, and to advance the condition thereof. hooker.
he is furnished with my opinion, which is lettered with his
own learning. shakespea: e.
heir to all his lands and goods,
which i have bette'd, rather than decreased. shakespeare.
but jonathan, to whem both hearts were known,
with well-tim'd zeal, and with an artful care,
resor'd, and better 'd soon, the nice affair. croor.
the church of england, the porest and best reformed
church in the world ; so well reormed, that it will be four:d
easier to alter than better its constitution. s-to-
the romans took pins to how out a possize for these lakes
to discharge themselves, for the bettering of the air. .44.joi.
2. to surpass ; to exceed.
the works of nature do always aim at that which cannot
be bettered. ho, f. r.
he hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age; he
hath, indeed, better lettered expectation, tha: you must ex-
pect of one to tell you. shaocure.
what you do
still betters what is done, when you speak sweet,
i’d have you do it cyer. sh.kosoecre.
3. to advance; to support.
the king thought his honour would su:ir, during a treaty,
to le: or a party, !}o on.
be for ek.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 253</div><p class="text">b e vv
be’rr er. m. s. [from the adjective..] superior; one to whom
recedence is to be given.
their betters would be hardly found, if they did not live
among men, but in a wilderness by themselves. hooker.
the courtesy of nations allows you my better, in that you
are the first-born. shakespeare.
that ye thus hospitably live,
is mighty grateful to your betters,
and makes e en gods themselves your debtors. prior.
i have some gold and silver by me, and shall be able to make
a sh;st, when many of my betters are starving. swift.
be torok. m. s. [from so bet.] one that lays betts or wa-
crs.
g i observed a stranger among them of a genteeler behaviour
than ordinary; but notwithstanding he was a very fair bettor,
nobody would take him up. adaison.
betty. m. s. [probably a cant word, signifying an instrument
which does what is too often done by a maid within..] an
instrument to break open doors.
record the stratagems, the arduous exploits, and the noc-
turnal scalades of needy heroes, describing the powerful betty,
or the artful picklock. arbuthnot.
bet we'en. prep. [becyeonan, betpınan, saxon; from the ori-
ginal word epa, two.]
1. in the intermediate space-
- what modes
of smell the headlong lioness between,
and hound sagacious on the tainted green
2. from one to another; noting intercourse.
he should think himself unhappy, if things should go so
between them, as he should not be able to acquit himself of
ingratitude towards them both. bacon.
• 3, belonging to two in partnership. -
i ask, whether castor and pollux, with only one soul between
them, which thinks and perceives in one what the other is
never conscious of, are not two distinet persons? locke.
4. bearing relation to two.
if there be any discord or suits between them and any of the
family, they are compounded and appeased. bacon.
fricndship requires, that it be between two at least; and there
can be no friendship where there are not two friends. south.
5. in separation, or distinction of one from the other.
their natural constitutions put so wide a difference between
some men, that art would never master. locke.
children quickly distinguish between what is required of
them, and what not. locke.
6. between is properly used of two, and among of more; but
perhaps this accuracy is not always preserved.
bet wi'xt, prep. [becyx, saxon. it has the same signification
with between, and is indifferently used for it.]
i. in the midst of two.
hard by, a cottage chimney smokes,
pope.
from betwixt two aged oaks. milton.
methinks, like two black storms on either hand,
our spanish army and your indians stand ;
this only place betwixt the clouds is clear. dryden.
if contradicting interests could be mixt,
nature herself has cast a bar betwixt. dryden.
2. from one to another.
five years since there was some speech of marriage
betwixt myself and her. shakespeare.
be’vel. \ n. j. in masonry and joinery, a kind of square, one
b evil. { leg of which is frequently crooked, according to the
sweep of an arch or vault. it is moveable on a point or cen-
tre, and to may be set to any angle. an angle that is not
square, is called a bevil angle, whether it be more obtuse, or
more acute, than a right angle. builder’s dic7.
their houses are very ill built, their walls bevil, without
one right angle in any apartment. swift.
to beovel. v. a. [from the noun..] to cut to a bevel angle.
these rabbets are ground square ; but the rabbets on the
groundsel are bevelled downwards, that rain may the freelier
fall off. 41.xon.
beow er. see beav er.
beverage. n.s.. [from bevere, to drink, ital.]
1. drink; liquor to be drank in general.
i.am his cupbearer;
if from me he have wholesome beverage,
account me not your servant. shakespeare.
grains, pulses, and all sorts of fruits, either bread or bever-
age, may be made almost of all. brown's pulgar errours.
a pleasant beverage he prepar'd before,
of wine and honey mix’d. dryden.
the coarse lean gravel on the mountain sides,
scarce dewy bev'rage for the bees provides. dryden.
2. beverage, or water cyder, is made by putting the mure into
a fat, adding water, as you desire it stronger or smaller.
the water should stand forty-eight hours on it, before you press
it; when it is pressed, tun it up immediately. 44%rt, mer.
3. a treat upon wearing a new suit of clothes.
4. a treat at first coming into a prison, called also garnish.
blow y. m. s. [leva, ital j -
vol. 1.
1. a flock of birds.
2. a company; an assembly.
and in the midst thereof upon the floor,
a lovely bevy of fair ladies sat,
courted of many a jolly paramour.
they on the plain
long had not walk'd, when, from the tents, behold
fairy queen.
a bevy of fair women. milton.
nor rode the nymph alone,
around a bevy of bright damsels shone. pope.
to bewa'il. v. a. [from wail.] to benoan; to lament; to
express sorrow for.
in this city he
hath widow’d and unchilded many a one,
which to this hour bewail the injury. shakespeare.
yet wiser ennius gave command to all
his friends, not to bewail his funeral. sir john denham.
i cannot but bewail, as in their first principles, the miseries
. . and calamities of our children. addison.
to bewail. v. n. to express grief.
thy ambition,
thou scarlet sin, robb’d this bewailing land
of noble buckingham, my father-in-law. shakespeare.
to bewa're. v. n. [from be and ware, or wary; that is, cau-
tious: thus, in an old treatise, i have found, be ye ware. see
wary. lepanian, saxon; warer, danish.]
1. to regard with caution; to be suspicious of danger from : ge-
nerally the particle of goes before the thing which excites cau-
tion.
you must beware of drawing or painting clouds, winds
and thunder, towards the bottom of your piece. dryden.
every one ought to be very careful to beware what he ad-
mits for a principle. locke.
warn'd by the sylph, oh, pious maid, beware /
this to disclose is all thy guardian can ;
beware of all, but most beware of man. pope.
2. it is observable, that it is only used in such forms of speech
as admit the word be: thus we say, he may beware, let him
beware, he will beware; but not, he did beware, or he has been
70a re.
to bewe'ep. v. a. [from weep.] to weep over or upon; to
bedev with tears.
old fond eyes,
beweep this cause again; i'll pluck ye out,
and cast you, with the waters that you lose,
to temper clay. shakespeare.
larded all with sweet flowers,
which bewept to the grave did go,
with true love showers. shakespeare.
to bewe’r. v. a. [from wet.] to wet; to moisten; to be-
dew ; to water.
his napkin, with his true tears all bewet, o
can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.
shakesp. titus andronicus.
to bewild er. v. a. [from wild.] to lose in pathless places;
to confound for want of a plain road; to perplex; to entan-
gle; to puzzle.
we parted thus; i homeward sped my way,
bewilder'd in the wood till dawn of day. dryden.
we no solution of our question find;
your words bewilder, not direct the mind. blackmore.
our understanding traces 'em in vain,
lost and bewilder'd in the fruitless search. addison.
it is good sometimes to lose and bewilder ourselves in such
studies. watts.
to bewitch. v. a. [from witch.]
1. to injure by witchcraft, or fascination, or charms.
look how i am bewitch'd; behold, mine arm
is like a blasted sapling wither'd up. shakspeare.
i have foresworn his company hourly this twenty years, and
yet i am bewitched with the rogue's company. if the rascal
has not given me medicines to make me love him, i'll be
hang'd shakespeare.
my flocks are free from love, yet look so thin ;
what magick has bewitch'd the woolly dams,
and what ill eyes beheld the tender lambs : dryden.
2. to charm; to please to such a degree, as to take away the
power of resistance.
doth even beauty beautify,
and most bewitch the wretched eye. sidney.
the charms of poetry our souls bewitch;
the cuise of writing is an endless itch. dryden.
i do not know, by the chara&amp;ter that is given of her works,
whether it is not for the benefit of mankind that they were
lost; they were filled with such bewitching tenderness and rap-
ture, that it might have been dangerous to have given them
a reading. addison.
bewi', cher y. m. s. [from bewitch..] fascination; charm;
resistless prevalence.
there is a certain bewitchery, or fascination in words, which
makes them operate with a force beyond what we can give an
account of. south.
3 b bewitch-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 254</div><p class="text">b i a
b i c
biwi’rch ment. n. s. [from bewitch..] fascination; power
of charming. -
i will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man,
and give it bountifully to the desirers. shakspeare.
73 bewra'y. v. a. [rnesan, bepne;an, saxon.]
1. to betray; to discover perfidiously.
fair feeling words he wisely 'gan display,
- and, for her humour fitting purpose, fain
to tempt the cause itself for to bewray. fairy queen.
2. to shew; to make visible: this word is now little in use.
she saw a pretty blush in philodea's cheeks bewray a modest
discontentment. sidney.
men do sometimes bewray that by deeds, which to confess
they are hardly drawn. hooker.
next look on him that seems for counsel fit,
whose silver locks beway his store of days. fairfax.
bew r a yer. n. s. [from bewray.] betrayer ; discoverer; di-
vulger.
when a friend is turned into an enemy, and a bewrayer of
secrets, the world is just enough to accuse the perfidiousness
of the friend. addison.
beyo'nd. prep. [beyeonb, begeonban, saxon.]
1. before ; at a distance not yet reached.
what's fame a fancy'd life in others breath,
a thing beyond us, ev'n before our death:
just what you hear, you have.
2. on the farther side of.
neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldst say, who shall
go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us? deut. xxx. 13.
now we are on land, we are but between death and life;
for we are beyond the old world and the new. bacon.
we cannot think men beyond sea will part with their mo-
ney for nothing. locke.
3. farther onward than.
he that sees a dark and shady grove,
stays not, but looks beyond it on the sky.
4. past; out of the reach of.
beyond the infinite and boundless reach
of mercy, if thou did'st this deed of death,
art thou damn'd, hubert.
yet these declare
thy goodness beyond thought, and pow'r divone. milton.
the just, wife, and good god, neither does, nor can require
of man any thing that is impossible, or naturally beyond his
power to do. south.
consider the situation of our earth; it is placed so conve-
niently, that plants flourish, and animals live; this is matter
of fact, and beyond all dispute. bentley.
5. above; proceeding to a greater degree than.
timotheus was a man both in power, riches, parentage,
goodness, and love of his people, beyond any of the great men
of my country. sidney.
one thing, in this enormous accident, is, i must confess,
to me beyond all wonder. j/otton.
to his expences, beyond his income, add debauchery, idle-
ness, and quarrels amongst his servants, whereby his manu-
factures are disturbed, and his business neglected. locke.
as far as they carry conviction to any man's understanding,
my labour may be of use: beyond the evidence it carries with
it, i advise him not to follow any man's interpretation. locke.
6. above in excellence.
his satires are incomparably beyond juvenal's; if to laugh
and rally, is to be preferred to railing and declaiming. dryden.
7. remote from ; not within the sphere of.
with equal mind, what happens, let us bear;
nor joy, nor grieve too much for things beyond our care.
dryden's falls.
pope.
herbert.
shakespeare.
8. to go beyond, is to deceive ; to circumvent.
she made earnest benefit of his jest, forcing him to do her
such services, as were both cumbersome and costly; while he
still thought he went beyond her, because his heart did not com-
mit the idolatry. sidney.
that no man go beyond, and defraud his brother in any
nnatter. 1 thos. iv. 6.
e... } n. s. that part of a ring in which the stone is
bf zil. fixed.
bezoar. m. s. [from pa, against,and zahar, poison, persick.]
a medicinal stone, formerly in high esteem as an antidote, and
brought from the east indies, where it is said to be found in
the dung of an animal of the goat kind, called pazan ; the
stone being formed in its belly, and growing to the size of an
acorn, and sometimes to that of a pigeon's egg. the pecu-
liar manner of its formation, is now supposed to be fabulous.
the name of this stone is applied to several chymical compo-
positions, designed for antidotes; as mineral, solar, and jo-
vial bezoars. savary. chambers.
bezo a r dick, adj. [from becoar.] medicines compounded with
bezzar.
the bezoardicks are necessary to promote sweat, and drive
forth the putrifica particles. floyer.
bia'n gulated. . adj. [from binus and angulus, lat.] hav-
bia'ngulou.s. } ing two corners or angles. dict.
eias. n.s.. [biais, fr. said to come from bihay, an old gaulish
word, signifying cross, or thwart j
1. the weight lodged on one side of a bowl, which turns it
from the straight line.
madam, we'll play at bowls
—'twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
and that my fortune runs against the bias. shakes eare.
2. anything which turns a man to a particular course; or gives
the direction to his measures.
you have been mistook :
but nature to her bias drew in that. shakespeare.
this is that boasted bias of thy mind,
by which one way to dulness 'tis inclin'd. dryden.
morality influences mens lives, and gives a bias to all their
actions. locke-
wit and humour, that expose vice and folly, furnish use-
ful diversions. raillery under such regulations, unbends the
mind from severer contemplations, without throwing it off
from its proper bias. addison's freeh-laer.
thus nature gives us, let it check our pride,
the virtue nearest to our vice ally’d ;
reason the bias turns to good or ill. pope.
3. propension; inclination.
as for the religion of our poet, he seems to have some
little bias towards the opinions of wickliff. dryden.
to b1"as. v. a. [from the noun.] to incline to some side;
to balance one way; to prejudice.
were i in no more danger to be misled by ignorance, than
i am to be biased by interest, i might give a very perfect ac-
count. locke-
a desire leaning to either side, biases the judgment strange-
ly; by indifference for every thing but truth, you will be
excited to examine. j/atts.
b1 as adv. it seems to be used adverbialy in the following
passage, conformably to the french, mettre une chose de liais,
to give any thing a wrong interpretation.
every action that hath gone before,
whereof we have record, trial did draw
lia; and thwart, not answering the aim.
shakespeare's troilus and croftia.
in the following passage it seems to be an adjective. sweiled,
as the bowl on the biased side. this is not used.
blow till thy bias check
outswell the cholic of puft aquilon.
shakespeare's troilus and crossia.
b1.b. m. s. a small piece of linen put upon the breasts of chil-
dren over their clothes. -
i would fain know, why it should not be as noble a task,
to write upon a lib and hanging-sleeves, as on the bulla and
practexta. addison.
to bib. v. n. [bib, lat.] to tipple; to sip; to drink fre-
quently.
he playeth with bibbing mother meroe, as though so named,
because she would drink mere wine without water. camden.
to appease a froward child, they gave him drink as often
as he cried ; so that he was constantly bibbing, and draak more
in twenty-four hours than i did. locke.
bibacious. adj. [bibax, lat..] addicled to drinking. dic.
biba. city. m. s. [bibacitas, lat..] the quality of drinking
much.
b1. bber. m. s. [from ta lib.] a tippler; a man that drinks
often.
b1 ele. n.s. [from 3,63.129, a book; called, by way of excel-
lence, the book.] the sacred volume in which are contain-
ed the revelations of god.
if we pass from the apostolick to the next ages of the church,
the primitive christians looked on their bibles as their most
important treasure. government of the tongue.
we must take heed how we accustom ourselves to a slight
and irreverent use of the name of god, and of the phrases
and expressions of the holy bible, which ought not to be ap-
plied upon every slight occasion. ‘s illotion.
in questions of natural religion, we should confirm and
improve, or connect our reasonings by the divine assistance of
the bible. as atts.
biblio grapher. m. s. [from £1323s, and yozoa, to write, ;
a writer of books; a transcriber. ico-
bibliot h e (cal. adj. [from bibliotheca, lat.] belonging to a
library. dr.o.
b. lu lous. adj. [bi'ulus, lat.] that which has the quality of
drinking moisture; spungy.
strow'd bibulous above, i see the sands,
the pebbly gravel next, and gutter'd rocks. thomson.
b. caps ular. adj. [bicapsularis, lat. j having the seed
vessel divided into two parts.
bice. n. s. the name of a colour used in painting. it is either
green or blue.
take green bice, and order it as you do your blue bice, you
may diaper upon it with the water of deep green. peachain.
*::::::::: ; aff. [biceps, bicipitis, lat.]
i. having two heads.
while
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 255</div><p class="text">b i d
b i f
while men believe bicipitous conformation in any species,
they admit a gemination of principal parts. brown's /ug. err.
2. it is applied to one of the muscles of the arm. .
a piece of flesh it exchanged from the bicipital muscle of
either party's arm. brown's vulgar errouri.
to bicker. v. n. [bire, welsh, a contest.]
1. to skirmish; to fight without a set battle; to fight off and
on.
they fell to such a bickering, that he got a halting, and
lost his picture. sidney.
in thy face
i see thy fury; if i longer stay,
we shall begin our ancient bickerings.
2. to quiver; to play backward and forward.
and from about him fierce effusion rowl'd
of smoke, and bickering flame, and sparkles dire. milton.
an icy gale, oft shifting o'er the pool,
breathes a blue film, and, in its mid career,
arrests the tickering stream.
block e rer. m. s. [from the verb.] a skirmisher.
block ern. m. s. [apparently corrupted from beakiron.] an iron
ending in a point.
a blacksmith's anvil is sometimes made with a pike, or
bickern, or beakiron, at one end. moxon.
e. { adj. [bicornis, lat.] having two horns.
we should be too critical, to question the letter y, or bi-
cornous element of pythagoras; that is, the making of the horns
equal. brown's wugar errours.
bico rporal. adj. [bicorpor, lat..] having two bodies.
to bid. v. a. pret. 1 bid, bad, bade, i have bid, or bidden. [bib-
ban, saxon.]
1. to desire; to ask ; to call; to invite.
i am bid forth to supper, jeffica;
there are my keys. shakespeare's march. of penice.
go ye into the highways, and, as many as you shall find,
bid to the marriage. matt. xxii. 9.
we ought, when we are bidden to great feasts and meetings,
to be prepared beforehand. hakewill.
2. to command; to order: before things or persons.
saint withold footed thrice the wold,
he met the nightmare, and her nine fold,
bid her alight, and her troth plight.
he chid the sisters,
when first they put the name of king upon me,
and bade them speak to him.
haste to the house of sleep, and bid the god,
who rules the nightly visions with a nod,
prepare a dream. dryden's fulles.
curse on the tongue that bids this general joy.
—can they be friends of antony, who revel
when antony's in danger ? dryden's all for love.
thames heard the numbers, as he flow'd along,
and bade his willows learn the moving song. pope.
acquire a government over your ideas, that they may come
when they are called, and depart when they are bidden. watts.
3. to offer; to propose : as, to bid a price.
come, and be true.—
—thou bids? me to my loss: for true to thee
were to prove false. shakespeare's cymbeline.
when a man is resolute to keep his fins while he lives, and
yet unwilling to relinquish all hope, he will embrace that pro-
fession which bids fairest to the reconciling those so distant in-
terests. decay of piety.
as when the goddesses came down of old,
with gifts their young dardanian judge they try’d,
and each bade high to win him to their fide. granville.
to give interest a share in friendship, is to sell it by inch of
candle; he that bids most shall have it: and when it is mer-
cenary, there is no depending on it. collier on friendship.
4. to proclaim; to offer; or to make known by some public
woicc.
our bans thrice bid ' and for our wedding day
my kerchief bought ! then press'd, then forc'd away. gay.
5. to pronounce; to declare. -
you are retir’d,
as if you were a feasted one, and not
the hostess of the meeting; pray you, bid
these unknown friends to's welcome. shakes care.
divers as we passed by them, put their arms a little abroad;
which is their gesture, when they bid any welcome. bacon.
how, didius, shall a roman, fore repuls'd,
grect your arrival to this distant isle
- how bid you welcome to these shatter'd legions? 4. philips.
6. to denounce.
thyself and oxford, with five thousand men,
shall cross the seas, and bid false edward battle.
shakespeare's henry vi.
she bid war to all that durst supply
the place of those her cruelty made die.
the captive cannibal, opprest with chains,
yet braves his foes, reviles, provokes, disdains;
shakespeare.
thomson.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
j/all. * ,
of nature fierce, untameable, and proud,
he bid defiance to the gaping crowd,
and spent at last, and speechless as he lies,
with fiery glances mocks their rage, and dies. granvil.
7. to pray. see bead.
if there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into your house, neither bid him god speed.
when they desired him to tarry longer with them, ho
sented not, but bade them farewel. 47, xviii. 21.
8. to bid beads is to distinguish each bead by a prayer.
by some haycock, or some shady thorii,
he bids his beads both even song and morn. dryden.
b1 dale. n. s. [from bid and al...] an invitation of friends to
drink at a poor man's house, and there to contribute cha-
rity. dicf.
b1. dden. part. pass. [from to bid.]
i. invited.
there were two of our company bidden to a feast of the
family. -
madam, the bidden guests are come.
2. commanded.
'tis these that early taint the female soul,
instruct the eyes of young coquettes to roll,
teach infants cheeks a bidden blush to know,
and little hearts to flutter at a beau. pope's r. of the lock.
bi'd der. m. s. [from to bid.] one who offers or proposes a
price.
he looked upon several dresses which hung there, exposed
to the purchase of the best bidder. addison.
b1. dding. m. s. [from bid.] command ; order.
how, say'st thou, that macduff denies his person
at our great bidding 2 shakespeare's macleth.
at his second bidding, darkness fled,
light shone, and order from disorder sprung. milton.
to bide. v. a. [biban, saxon.] to endure; to suffer: com-
monly to abide. -
poor naked wretches, wherefoe'er you are,
that bide the pelting of this pitiless storm. shakespeare.
the wary dutch this gathering storm foresaw,
bacon.
a. philips.
and durst not bide it on the english coast. dryden.
to bide. v. n. -
1. to dwell; to live; to inhabit.
all knees to thee shall bow, of them that bile
in heav'n, or earth, or under earth in hell. milton.
2. to remain in a place.
safe in a ditch he bides,
with twenty trenched gashes on his head;
the least a death to nature. shakespeare's macbeth.
3. to continue in a state.
and they also, if they bide not still in unbelief, shall be
graffed in. romani, xi. 23.
4. it has probably all the significations of the word abide; which
see : but it being grown somewhat obsolete, the examples of
its various meanings are not easily found.
bidental. adj. [bidens, lat.] having two teeth.
ill management of forks is not to be helped, when they are
only bidental. swift.
b1 ding. m. s. [from bide..] residence; habitation.
at antwerp has my constant biding been. rowe.
bie'nnial. adj. [biennis, lat..] of the continuance of two
cars.
then why should some be very long lived, others only
annual or biennial? ray on the creation.
bier. m. s. [from to bear, as seretrum, in latin, from fero. j
a carriage, or frame of wood, on which the dead are carried
to the grave.
and now the prey of fowls he lies,
nor wail'd of friends, nor laid on groaning tier. spensor.
they bore him barefaced on the bier,
and on his grave rain'd many a tear. shakespeare.
he must not float upon his wat'ry bier,
unwept. 44ilton.
griefs always green, a houshold still in tears:
sad pomps, a threshold throng'd with daily birs,
and liveries of black. drydn's javenal.
make as if you hanged yourself, they will convey your body
out of prison in a bier. arbuthnot's john bull.
b1 estisos. m. s. [byrong, saxon.]. the first milk given by a
cow after calving, which is very thick.
and twice besides, her biesłings never fail
to store the dairy with a brimming pail. dryoen.
bifarious, adj. [hifarius, lat..] twofold; what may be
understood two ways. dic.
b1 ferous. adj. [hiserens, lat.] bearing fruit twice a-year.
b1 fid. adj. [bifidus, lat. a botanical term.] divided
b1 fidate d. { into two ; split in two ; opening with a cleft.
bifool d. adj. [from binus, lat. and fold j. twofold; double.
if beauty have a soul, this is not she ,
if souls guide vows, it vows are sanctimony,
if sanctimony be the gods delight,
if there be rule in unity itself,
--
this
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 256</div><p class="text">b i g
b i l
this is not she, o madness-of discourse !
that cause sets up with and against thyself!
bifold authority. shakespeare's troilus and crossida.
b:"for med. adj. [bsorptis, lat..] compounded of two forms,
or bodies.
e: fuoc a fed. adj. [from binus, two, and furca, a fork, lat.]
shooting out, by a division, into two heads.
a small white piece, bifurcated, or branching into two, and
finely reticulated all over. //oodward.
bifu rca"rios. m. s. [from binus and sarca, lat..] division into
two; opening into two parts.
the first catachrestical and far derived similitude, it holds
with man; that is, in a bifurcation, or division of the root into
two parts. brown's pugar errouri.
big. adj. [this word is of uncertain, or unknown etymology;
junius derives it from 32 yao ; skinner from big, which, in
danish, signifies the belly.]
1. great in bulk; large. -
both in addition and division, either of space or duration,
when the idea under consideration becomes very lig, or very
small, its precise bulk becomes obscure and confused. locke.
a troubled ocean, to a man who sails in it, is, i think, the
biggest object that he can see in motion. spectator.
2. teeming; pregnant; great with young : with the particle
with.
a bear big with young hath seldom been seen. bacon.
lately on yonder swelling bush,
big with many a common rose,
this early bud began to blush. j/aller.
3. sometimes with of, but rarely.
his gentle lady,
big of this gentleman, our theme, deceas'd
as he was born. shakespeare's cymbeline.
4. full of something; and desirous, or about, to give it vent.
the great, th’ important day,
big with the fate of cato and of rome. adson.
now big with knowledge of approaching woes,
the prince of augurs, halithrests, rose. pope.
5. distended; swoln; ready to burst: used often of the effects
of passion, as grief, rage.
thy heart is big ; get thce apart, and weep.
shufosfeare's julius cæsar.
6. great in air and mien; proud; swelling; tumid; haughty;
furly.
'how else, said he, but with a good bold face,
and with big words, and with a stately pace spensor.
to the meaner man, or unknown in the court, seem some-
what solemn, coy, big, and dangerous of look, talk, and an-
swer. ascham.
if you had looked big, and spit at him, he'd have run.
shakespeare's is inter's tale.
in his prosperous season, he fell under the reproach of
being a man of big looks, and of a mean and abject spirit.
clarend.n.
or does the man i' th' moon look big, -
or wear a huger periwig,
than our own native lunaticks. hudibras.
of governments that once made such a noise, and looked so
big in the eyes of mankind, as being founded upon the deepest
counsels, and the strongest force; nothing remains of them but
a name. south.
thou thyself, thus insolent in state,
art but perhaps some country magistrate,
whose power extends no farther than to speak
big on the bench, and scanty weights to break.
to grant big thraso valour, phormio sense,
should indignation give, at least offence.
7. great in spirit; lofty; brave.
what art thou ? have not i
an arm as big as thine a heart as big o'
thy words i grant, are bigger: for 1 wear not
my dagger in my mouth. shakespeare's cymbeline.
b1"gam is t. m. s. [bigamus, low lat..] one that has committed
bigamy. see b1g am y.
by the papal canons, a clergyman, that has a wife, cannot
have an ecclesiastical benefice; much less can a bigamist have
such a benefice, according to that law. ayloff.
b1 ga my. m. s. [bigamia, low latin.]
1. the crime of having two wives at once.
a beauty-waining and distressed widow
seduc’d the pitch and height of all his thoughts,
to base declension, and loath'd bigamy. shakespeare.
randal determined to commence a suit against martin, for
bigamy and incest. arbuthnot and pope.
2. [in the canon law.] the marriage of a second wife, or of a
widow, or a woman already debauched; which, in the church
of rome, were considered as bringing a man under some in-
capacities for ecclesiastical offices. *
bigbellied. adj. [from big and bely.) pregnant; with child;
great with young. -
when we have laught to see the sails conceive,
and grow big bellied with the wanton wind. shakes care,
dryden.
garth.
children and bigbellied women require antidotes somewhat
more grateful to the palate. harvey-
so many well shaped innocent virgins are blocked up, and
waddle up and down like bisbelied women. addisori-
we pursued our march, to the terror of the market people.
and the miscarriage of half a dozen bigbellied women. aud/2a-
b1 ggin. m. s. [beguin, fr. j a child's cap.
sleep now !
yet not so sound, and half so deeply sweet,
as he, whose brow with homely biggin bound,
snores out the watch of night. shakes eare.
big ht. n.s. it is explained by skinner, the circumference of a
coil of rope.
biogly. adv. [from big.] tumidly; haughtily; with a bluster-
ing manner.
would'st thou not rather choose a small renown,
to be the may’r of some poor paultry town ;
bigy to look, and barb'rously to speak;
to pound false weights, and scanty measures break 2
pryden.
big ness. n.s.. [from big.]
1. bulk; greatness of quantity.
if panicum be laid below, and about the bottom of a root,
it will cause the root to grow to an excessive big mess. bacon.
people were surprized at the bigny; and uncoo:h deformity
of the camel. l'etrange's fators.
- the brain of man, in respect of his body, is much larger
than any other animal's ; exceeding in bognes; three oxen's
brains. ray on the creation-
2. size; whether greater or smaller; comparative bulk.
several sorts of rays make vibrations of several bignoses, which.
according to their lignesses, excite sensations of several colours;
and the air, according to their bignoses, excites sensations of se-
veral founds. new’on's opticos.
bi got. m. s. [the etymology of this word is unknown ; but
it is supposed, by camden and others, to take its rise from some
occasional phrase.} : a man devoted to a certain party; pre-
judiced in favour of certain opinions; a blind zealot. it is
used often with to before the object of zeal; as, a bigot to the
cartesian tenets.
religious spite, and pious spleen bred first
this quarrel, which so long the bigots nurst. t.fe.
in philosophy and religion, the bigots of all partics are gene-
rally the most positive. j/arts.
bio or ed. adj. [from bigot.] blindly preposs slid in favour of
something ; irrationally zealous: with to.
bigotted to this idol, we disclaim
reft, health, and ease, for nothing but a name. garza.
presbyterian merit, during the reign of that weak, bigotted,
and ill-advised prince, will easily be computed. swift.
b1 got ry. m. s. [from bigot.]
1. blind zeal; prejudice; unreasonable warmth in favour of
party or opinions: with the particle to.
were it not for a bigotry to our own tenets, we could hardly
imagine, that so many absurd, wicked, and bloody principles,
should pretend to support themselves by the gospel. joats.
2. the practice or tenet of a bigot.
our silence makes our adversaries think we persist in those
bigotries, which all good and sensible men despise. patz.
bio swol n. adj. [from big and swoln.] turgid; ready to built.
might my bigswoln heart
vent all its gricts, and give a loose to sorrow. alison.
bio-udder ed. adj. [from big and uader.] having large ud-
ders; having dugs swelled with milk. “
now driv'n before him, through the arching rock,
came, tumbling heaps on heaps, th' unnumber'd flock,
big-udder'd evs, and goats of female kind. 1’s “e.
bi'l ander. m. s. [belandre, fr.] a small vessel of about eighty
tons burden, used for the carriage of goods. it is a kind of
hoy, manageable by four or five inen, and has matts and fails
after the manner of a hoy. they are used chiefly in holland,
as being particularly fit for the canals. savury. i review.
like bilanders to creep
along the coast, and land in view to keep. drydew.
bi'lber ry. m. s. [from bilic, sax, a bladder, and berry; ac-
cording to skinner ; vitis idea. j a small shrub; and a sweet
berry of that shrub ; whortleberry.
cricket, to windsor chimneys shalt thou leap;
there pinch the maids as blue as bilberries. shakespeare.
bi'lbo. n. s. [corrupted from bilboa, where the best weapons
are made.] a rapier ; a sword.
to be compassed like a good bilbo, in the circumference of
a peck, hilt to point, heel to head. sha-espeare.
bilbo es. m. s. a sort of stocks, or wooden shackles for the
feet, used for punishing offenders at sea.
methought i lay,
worse than the mutines, in the bilhoes. shakoff, are.
bile. m. s. [bilis, lat..] a thick, yellow, bitter liq or, sepa-
rated in the liver, collected in the gall-bladder, and jischarged
into the lower end of the duodenum, or beginning of the jojo.
num, by the common duct. its use is to theathe or blun: the
acids of the chyle; because they, being entang!-d with its sui-
8 phu's,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 257</div><p class="text">b i l
b i l
phurs, thicken it so, that it cannot be sufficiently diluted by
the suscus pancreaticus, to enter the lasteal vessels. qingy.
in its progression, soon the labour'd chyle
receives the confluent rills of bitter bile;
which, by the liver sever'd from the blood,
and striving through the gall pipe, here unload
their yellow streams. blackmore:
bile: m. s. [bije, sax. perhaps from bilis, lat. this is gene-
rally spelt boil; but, i think, less properly.] a fore angry
swelling.
but yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
or, rather, a disease that's in my flesh ;
thou art a bile in my corrupted blood. shakespeare.
those biles did run—say so—did not the general run ? were
not that a botchy sore ? shakespeare.
a furunculus is a painful tubercle, with a broad basis, aris-
ing in a cone. it is generally called a bile, and is accom-
panied with inflammation, pulsation, and tension. jwiseman.
bilge. the compass or breadth of a ship's bottom. skinner.
to bilg e. v. n. [from the noun..] to spring a leak; to let in
water, by striking upon a rock: a sea term; now bulge. skin.
bi'll ary. adj. [from bilis, lat..] belonging to the bile.
voracious animals, and such as do not chew, have a great
quantity of gall; and some of them have the biliary duct in-
serted into the pylorus. arbuthnot.
biolin gsc at e. m. s. [a cant word, borrowed from bilingsgate
in london, a place where there is always a crowd of low peo-
ple, and frequent brawls and foul language.] ribaldry; foul
language.
there stript, fair rhetorick languish'd on the ground,
and shameful bilingsgate her robes adorn. pope.
bill'nguous, adj. [bilinguis, lat.] having, or speaking two
tongues.
po adj. [from bilis, lat.] consisting of bile ; partaking
of bile.
why bilious juice a golden light puts on,
and floods of chyle in silver currents run. garth.
when the taste of the mouth is bitter, it is a sign of a re-
dundance of a bilicus alkali. arbuthnot.
to bilk. v. a. [derived by mr. lye from the gothick, bilai-
can.] to cheat; to defraud, by running in debt, and avoid-
ing payment.
bilk'd stationers for yeomen stood prepar’d.
what comedy, what farce can more delight,
than grinning hunger, and the pleasing fight -
of your bilk'd hopes: - dryden.
|bill. m.s.. [bile, sax. see ball.] the beak of a fowl.
their bills were thwarted crossways at the end, and, with
these they would cut an apple in two at one snap. carew.
it may be tried, whether birds may not be made to have
dryden,
greater or longer bills, or greater or longer talons. bacon.
in his bill
an olive leaf he brings, pacifick sign milton.
no crowing cock does there his wings display,
nor with his horny bill provoke the day. dryden.
bill. m. s. [bille, sax. epibille, a two edged axe.]
1. a kind of hatchet with a hooked point, used in country work,
as a hedging bill; so called from its resemblance in form to the
beak of a bird of prey.
standing troops are servants arm’d, who use the lance and
sword, as other servants do the sickle, or the bill, at the com-
mand of those who entertain them. temple.
2. a kind of weapon anciently carried by the foot; a battle axe.
yea distaff women manage rusty bills;
against thy seat both young and old rebel.
bill. n.s.. [billet, french.]
1. a written paper of any kind.
he does receive
particular addition from the bill
that writes them all alike.
2. an account of money.
ordinary expence ought to be limited by a man's estate, and
ordered to the best, that the bills may be less than the estima-
tion abroad. bacon.
3. a law presented to the parliament, not yet made an act.
no new laws can be made, nor old laws abrogated or al-
tered, but by parliament; where bills are prepared, and pre-
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
sented to the two houses. bacon.
how now for mitigation of this bill,
urg'd by the commons doth his majesty
incline to it, or no shakespeare.
4. an act of parliament.
there will be no way left for me to tell you that i remem-
ber you, and that i love you, but that one, which needs no
open warrant, or secret conveyance; which no bills can pre-
clude, nor no kings prevent. atterbury.
5. a physician's prescription.
like him that took the doctor's bill,
and swallow’d it instead o' th' pill. hudibras.
the medicine was prepar'd according to the bill. l’estrange.
let them, but under your superiours, kill,
when doctors first have sign'd the bloody bill.
dryden.
vol. i.
6. an advertisement.
and in despair, their empty pit to fill,
set up some foreign monster in a bill.
7. [in law.]
1. an obligation, but without condition or forfeiture for
nonpayment. 2. a declaration in writing, that expresseth
either the grief and the wrong, that the complainant hath
suffered by the party complained of; or else some fault, that the
party complained of hath committed against some law. this
bill is sometimes offered to justices errants in the general as-
sizes ; but most to the lord chancellor. it containe.h the fact
complained of, the damages thereby suffered, and petition of
process against the defendant for redress. cowel.
the fourth thing very maturely to be consulted by the jury,
is, what influence their finding the bill may have upon the
kingdom. swift.
drydon.
8. a bill of mortality. an account of the numbers that have died
in any district.
most who took in the weekly bills of mortality, made little
other use of them, than to look at the foot, how the buria's en-
creased or decreased. graunt.
so liv'd our sires, ere doctors learn'd to kill,
and multiply'd with theirs the weekly bill. dryden.
9. a bill of fare. an account of the season of provisions, or of
the dishes at a feast.
it may seem somewhat difficult to make out the bills of fare
for some of the forementioned suppers. arbuthnot.
10. a bill of exchange. a note ordering the payment of a sum of
money in one place, to some person assigned by the drawer or
o, in consideration of the value paid to him in another
place.
the comfortable sentences are bills of exchange, upon the
credit of which we lay our cares down, and receive provisions.
taylor.
all that a bill of exchange can do, is to direet to whom mo-
ney is due, or taken up upon credit, in a foreign country,
shall be paid. locke.
to bill. v. n. [from bill, a beak.] to caress, as doves by
joining bills; to be fond.
doves, they say, will bill, after their pecking, and their
murmuring. ben. johnson's catiline.
still amorous, and fond, and billing,
like philip and mary on a shilling. hudibras.
they bill, they tread ; alcyone compress'd,
seven days sits brooding on her floating nest. dryden.
he that bears th’ artillery of jove,
the strong pounc'd eagle, and the billing dove. dryden.
to bill. v. a. [from bill, a writing.] to publish by an adver-
tisement : a cant word.
his masterpiece was a composition that he billed about under
the name of a sovereign antidote. l’estrange.
bi'll et. m. s. [billet, french.]
i. a small paper; a note.
when he found this little billet, in which was only written
remember caesar, he was exceedingly confounded. clarendon.
2. a ticket directing soldiers at what house to lodge.
3. billet doux, or a soft billet; a love letter.
'twas then, belinda! if report say true,
thy eyes first open'd on a billet doux. pope.
4. [bilot, fr.] a small log of wood for the chimney.
let us then calculate, when the bulk of a fagot or billet is
dilated and rarified to the degree of fire, how vast a place it
must take up. digby on bodies.
their billet at the fire was found. prior.
to bi'llet. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to dire&amp;t a soldier by a ticket, or note, where he is to lodge.
retire thee; go where thou art billeted:
away, i say.
2. to quarter soldiers.
they remembered him of charging the kingdom, by billeting
soldiers. raleigh.
the counties throughout the kingdom were so incensed,
and their affections poisoned, that they refused to suffer the
soldiers to be billeted upon them. clarendon.
bi'lliards. n. s. without a singular. [billard, fr. of which that
language has no etymology; and therefore they probably de-
rived from england both the play and the name, which is cor-
rupted from balyards, yards of sticks with which a ball is dri-
ven along a table. thus spenser;
balyards much unfit,
and shuttlecocks misseeming manly wit. hubberd's tale.]
a game at which a ball is forced against another on a table.
let it alone; let's to billiards. shakespeare.
even nose and cheek, withal,
ben. johnson.
shakespeare.
smooth as is the billiard ball.
some are forced to bound or fly upwards, almost like ivory
balls meeting on a billiard table. boyle.
when the ball obeys the stroke of a billiard stick, it is not
any action of the ball, but bare passion. locke.
bitllow. n.s. [bilge, germ. bolg, dan, probably of the same
original with biliz, sax, a bladder.] a wave swoln, and
hollow.
3c from
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 258</div><p class="text">from whence the river dee, as silver cleen,
his tumbling billows roll with gentle rore. . . spensor.
bilow, sink by degrees, even when the wind is down that
first stirred them. - - - //otton.
chasing nereus with his trident throws
the billow; from the bottom. denham.
but when loud ow; lash the sounding shore,
the hoarse rough verse should like the torrent roar. pope.
7% b1 1. low. v. n. [from the noun..] to swell, or roll, as a
wawc.
the hillowing snow, and violence of the show'r,
that from the hills disperse their dreadful store,
and o'er the vales collected ruin pour. prior.
bi'llow y. adj. [from billow.] swelling ; turgid ; wavy.
and whitening down the mosly-tinctur'd stream,
descends the billowy foam. thomson.
b1s. n.s.. [binne, sax.] a place where bread, or corn, or wine,
is reposited.
the most convenient way of picking hops, is into a long
square frame of wood, called a bin. martimer.
as when from rooting in a bin,
all powder'd o'er from tail to chin,
a lively maggot fallies out,
you know him by his hazel snout. swift.
b1'n ary. adj [from binus, lat..] two ; dual ; double.
b1'n ary a, ithm, tick. a method of computation proposed by
mr. leibnitz, in which, in lieu of the ten figures in the
common arithmetick, and the progression from ten to ten, he
has only two figures, and uses the simple progression from two
to two. this method appears to be the same with that used
by the chinese four thousand years ago. chambers.
to bind. v. a. pret. 1 bound; particip. pass. bound, or bounden,
[binban, sax.]
1. to confine with bonds; to enchain.
wilt thou play with him as with a bird * or wilt thou bind
him for thy maidens f job.
2. to gird ; to enwrap; to involve.
who hath bound the waters in a garment 2 proverbs.
. to fasten to any thing; to fix by circumvolution.
thou shalt bind this line of scarlet thread in the window,
which thou didst let us down by. joshua.
keep my commandments, and live ; and my law, as the
apple of thine eye. bund them upon thy fingers, write them
upon the table of thine heart. proverbs. .
4. to fasten together.
gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles,
to burn them. matthew.
5. to cover a wound with dressings and bandages: with up.
wnen he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went
to him, and bound up his wounds. luke.
having filled up the bared cranium with our dressings, we
bound up the wound. j/iseman.
6. to oblige by stipulation, or oath.
if a man vow a vow, or swear an oath to bind his soul with
a bond, he shall not break his word. numbers.
swear by the solemn oath, that binds the gods. pope.
7. to oblige by duty or law ; to compel; to constrain.
though i am bound to every act of duty,
i am not bound to that, all slaves are free to. shakespeare.
duties expressly required in the plain language of scripture,
ought to bind our consciences more than those which are but
dubiously inferred, j/atts.
8. to oblige by kindness.
9. to confine; to hinder : with in, if the restraint be local ;
with up, if it relate to thought or act.
now i’m cabin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in
to saucy doubts and fears. shakespeare.
you will sooner, by imagination, bind a bird from finging,
than from eating or flying. bacon.
though passion be the most obvious and general, yet it is
not the only cause that binds up the understanding, and con-
fines it, for the time, to one object, from which it will not be
taken off. locke.
in such a dismal place
where joy ne'er enters, which the sun ne'er cheers,
bound in with darkness, overspread with damps. dryden.
10. to hinder the flux of the bowels; to make costive.
rhubarb hath manifestly in it parts of contrary operations;
parts that purge, and parts that bind the body. bacon.
the whey of milk doth loose, the milk doth bind.
herbert.
11. to restrain.
the more we are bound up to an exast narration, we want
more life, and fire, to animate and inform the story. felton.
12. to bind a book. to put it in a cover.
was ever book, containing such vile matter,
so fairly bound
those who could never read the grammar,
when my dear volumes touch the hammer,
shakespeare.
may think books best, as richest bound. prior.
i 3. to bind to. to oblige to serve some one.
if still thou dost retain
the same ill habits, the same follies too,
still thou art bound to vice, and still a slave. dryden.
14. to bind to. to contract with any body.
art thou bound to a wife, fc k not to be loosed. 1 cor.
15. to bind over. to oblige to make appearance.
sir roger was staggered with the reports concerning this
woman, and would have bound her over to the county sessions.
addison.
to bind. v. m.
1. to contract its own parts together; to grow stiff and hard.
if the land rise full of clots, and if it is a binding land, you
must make it fine by harrowing of it. a” timer.
2. to make costive.
3. to be obligatory.
those canons, or imperial constitutions, which have not
been received here, do not bind. hale.
the promises and bargains for truck, between a swiss and
an indian, in the woods of america, are binding to them,
though they are perfectly in a state of nature, in reference to
locke.
one another.
bind. m. s. a species of hops.
the two best sorts are the white and the grey bind; the
latter is a large square hop, and more hardy. mortimer.
bi'nder. m. s. [from to bind.]
1. a man whose trade it is to bind books.
2. a man that binds sheaves.
three binders stood, and took the handfuls reapt
from boys that gather'd quickly up. chapman.
a man, with a binder, may reap an acre of wheat in a day,
if it stand well. mortimer.
3. a fillet; a shred cut to bind with.
a double cloth, of such length and breadth as might serve
to encompass the fractured member, i cut from each end to
the middle, into three binders. joseman.
bi'nding. m. s. [from bind.] a bandage.
this beloved young woman began to take off the linding of
his cyes. tatler.
bi'ndw fed. m. s. [convolvulus, lat.] the name of a plant.
bindweed is the larger and the smaller; the first sort flowers
in september, and the last in june and july. a sortimer.
bi'nocle. n.s.. [from linus and oculus.] a kind of dioptrick
telescope, fitted so with two tubes joining together in one,
as that a distant object may be seen with both eyes toge-
ther. harris-
bi'nocular, adj. [from binus and oculus, lat] having two
eyes.
most animals are binocular, spiders for the most part oelo-
nocular, and some senocular. derhazn.
bino'mial root, [in algebra.] a root composed of only two
parts connected with the signs plus or minus. harris.
bino'minous, adj. [from linus and nomen, lat.] having two
inannes.
biographer. m. s. [3gp and yozoa.] a writer of lives; a
relater not of the history of nations, but of the actions of par-
ticular persons.
our grubstreet biographers watch for the death of a great
man, like so many undertakers, on purpose to make a penny
of him. adaison.
biography, n. s. [3,3o and yoz?...] -
in writing the lives of men, which is called biography, some
authors place every thing in the precise order of time when it
occurred. j/atts.
br'ovac. ) m. s. [fr. from wey wach, a double guard, ger-
bi'how ac. ; man.] a guard at night performed by the whole
bivouac. ) army; which either at a siege, or lying before an
enemy, every evening draws out from its tents or huts, and
continues all night in arms. not in use. trevoux. harris.
biopa rous. adj. ifrom binus and pario, lat.] bringing forth
two at a birth.
b1 partite. adj. [from binus and partior, lat.] having two
correspondent parts; divided into two.
bipart1'tion. n. s. [from bipartite.] the aet of dividing into
two ; or of making two correspondent parts.
bioped. m. s. shipes, lat..] an animal with two feet.
no serpent, or fishes oviparous, have any stones at all ;
neither liped nor quadruped oviparous, have any exteriourly.
brown's pulgar erroirs.
b1 ped al. adj. [bipedalis, lat.] two fect in length; or hav-
ing two feet.
brpe's nated. ad. [from binus and penna, lat.] having two
wings. -
all bipennated inse&amp;is have poises joined to the body. derham.
bipeta lous. adj. [of bis, lat. and welzxoy, j a flower con-
fifting of two leaves. dicf.
b1"qv adrate. m. s. sin algebra.] the fourth power, arising
o from the multiplication of a square num-
ber or quantity by itself. harris.
birch tree. [binc, sax. h. tuli, lat.] the leaves are like
those of the poplar ; the shoots are very slender and weak;
the katkins are produced at remote distances from the fruits,
- 6
on
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 259</div><p class="text">b i r.
b i r
o
on the same tree; the fruit becomes a little squamose cone ;
the seeds are winged, and the tree casts its outer rind every
fear. miller.
b1. rc111n. adj. [from birch. made of birch.
his beaver'd brow a birchen garland bears. pope.
bird. m. s. [birb, or brib, a chicken, saxon.] a general term
for the feathered kind ; a fowl. in common talk, fowl is used
for the larger, and bird for the smaller kind of feathered ani-
mals.
the poor wren,
the most diminutive of birds, will fight,
her young ones in her nest, against the owl. shakespeare. -
sh’ had all the regal makings of a queen;
as holy oil, edward confessor's crown,
the rod and bird of peace, and all such emblems, -
laid nobly on her. shakespeare's henry viii.
the bi: dof jove stoop'd from his airy tour,
two birds of gayest plume before him drove. milton.
hence inch and beasts the breath of life obtain,
and birds of air, and monsters of the main. dryden.
there are some birds that are inhabitants of the water, whose
blood is cold as fishes, and their flesh is so like in taste, that
the scrupulous are allowed them on fish days. locke.
to bird. v. n. [from the noun...] to catch birds.
i do invite you to-morrow morning to my house,to breakfast;
after we'll a birding together. shakespeare.
b1 rd bolt. n.s.. [from bird and bolt, or arrow.] an arrow,
broad at the end, to be shot at birds.
to be generous and of free disposition, is to take those
things for birdbolts, that you deem cannon bullets. shakespeare.
b1 rdc age. m. s. [from bird and cage.] an enclosure with in-
terstitial spaces made of wire or wicker in which birds are
kept. -
* taught him the pully, and tops the centrifugal
force. - as outhnot and pope.
bi'rd catch er. m. s. [from bird and catch..] one that makes
it his employment to take birds.
a poor lark entered into a miserable expostulation with a
birdcatcher, that had taken her in his net. l'estrange.
b1 rd er. m. s. [from bird...] a birdcatcher.
b1 rding piece, n.f. [from bird and piece..] a fowling piece;
a gun to shoot birds with.
i'll creep up into the chimney.-there they always use to
discharge their birding-pieces ; creep into the kill hole.
shakespeare.
b1'rdlime. m. s. [from bird and line.] a glutinous substance,
which is spread upon twigs, by which the birds that light upon
them are entangled.
birdlime is made of the bark of holly: they pound it into
a tough paste, that no fibres of the wood be left; then it is
washed in a running stream, till no motes appear, and put
up to ferment, and scummed, and then laid up for use; at
which time they incorporate with it a third part of nut oil,
over the fire. but the bark of our lantone, or wayfaring
shrub, will make very good birdline. chambers.
holly is of so viscous a juice, as they make birdlime of the
bark of it. bacon's natural history.
with stores of gather'd glue, contrive
to stop the vents and crannies of their hive ;
not birdlime, or idean pitch produce
a more tenacious mass of clammy juice.
i’m ensnar'd ;
heav'ns birdiime wraps me round, and glues my wings.
- dryden.
the woodpecker, and other birds of this kind, because they
prey upon flies which they catch with their tongue, have a
couple of bags filled with a viscous humour, as if it were a
natural birdlime, or liquid glue. grew.
bi'rdman. m. s. [from bird and man.] a birdcatcher; a
fowler.
as a fowler was bending his net, a blackbird asked him what
he was doing; why, says he, i am laying the foundations of a
city; and so the birdman drew out of fight. l’estrange.
bi'rds cher ry. m. s. spadus theophrasii.] a plant.
bi'rds eye. m. s. [adonis, lat.] the name of a plant.
b1 rds foot. m. s. [ornithopodium, lat..] the name of a plant.
dryden.
b1 rds nest. m. s. an herb. dics.
bi'rdst ares. n.s.. [aracus.] a plant.
bi'rd stongue. n. s. an herb. dic7.
bi'rgander. m. s. schena'opex.] a fowl of the goose kind. dicf.
b1rt. n.s. a fish ; the same with the turbot ; which see.
birth. m. s. sbc.or's, sax.]
1. the act of coming into life.
but thou art fair and at thy birth, dear boy,
nature and fortune join'd to make thee great.
shakespeare's king john.
in spain, our springs like old mens children be,
decay’d and wither'd from their infancy;
no kindly showers fall on our barren earth,
all truth i shall relate: nor first can i
myself to be of grecian birth deny. i).nh.”.
3. rank which is inherited by descent.
he doth object, i am too great of birth. shakspeare.
be just in all you say, and all you do ;
whatever be your birth, you're sure to be
a peer of the first magnitude to me. dryden.
4. the condition or circumstances in which any man is born.
high in his chariot then halcius came,
a foe by birth to troy's unhappy name. drydon.
• 5. o born ; production ; used of vegetable, as well as ani-
ina s.
the people scar me; for they do observe
unfather'd heirs and loathly births of nature.
that poets are far rarer birth; than kings,
your noblest father prov’d. -&gt;
who of themselves
abhor to join : and, by imprudence mix',',
produce prodigious births, of body or mind.
she, for this many thousand years,
seems to have practis'd with much care,
to frame the race of woman fair;
yet never could a perfect birth
produce before, to grace the earth.
his eldest birth
flies, mark'd by heav'n, a fugitive o'er earth.
the vallies smile, and with their flow'ry face,
and wealthy births, confess the flood's embrace. blackmore.
others hatch their eggs, and tend the birth, till it is able to
shift for itself. addison.
6. the act of bringing forth.
that fair syrian shepherdess,
who after years of barrenness,
the highly favour’d joseph bore
to him that serv'd for her before;
and at her next birth, much like thee,
through pangs fled to felicity. alsoston.
7. the seamen call a due or proper distance between ships lying
at an anchor, or under sail, a birth. aiso the proper place
aboard for the mess to put their chests, &amp;c. is called the lio,
of that mess. also a convenient place to moor a ship in, is
shaos?.
ben. jolson.
as...t ... h.
j/aller.
prior.
called a birth. isarris.
bi'rthday. m. s. [from birth and day.] -
i. the day on which any one is born. -
orient light,
exhaling first from darkness, they beheld
birthday of heaven and earth. milton.
2. the day of the year in which any one was born, annually ob-
served.
this is my birthday; as this very day
was cassius born. shakesheare.
they tell me, ’tis my birthday, and i'll keep it -
with double pomp of sadness:
'tis what the day deserves, which gave me breath. dryden.
your country dames,
whose cloaths returning birthday claims. prizr.
bi'rthdom. n.s.. [this is erroneously, i think, printed in
shakespeare, birthdown. it is derived from birth and &amp;m. sce
dom ; as kingdom, dukedom j privilege of birth.
- let us rather
hold fast the mortal sword; and, like good men,
bestride our downfalin birthdom. shaks care.
b1rthnight. n. s. [from birth and night ]
1. the night on which any one is born. -
th' angclick song in bethlehem field,
on thy birthnight, that sung the saviour born. par. rog.
2. the night annually kept in memory of any one's birth. "
a youth more glitt'ring than a birthnight beau. pope.
b1 rthplace. n.s. [from birth and place..] place where any
one is born. -
my birthplace hate i, and iny love's upon -
this cnemy's town. shakes care.
a degree of stupidity beyond even what we have been
charged with, upon the score of our birt's ace and climate.
sovi
b1 rthright. n.s.. [from birth and right.] the rights and
privileges to which a man is born ; the right of the first born.
thy blood and virtue
contend for empire in thee, and thy goodnes,
shares with thy birthright. shakes care.
thou hast been found
by merit, more than birthright, son of god. milton.
i lov'd her first, i cannot quit the claim,
but will preserve the birthright of my passion. otway.
while no baseness in this breast i find,
i have not lost the birthright of my mind. drydon,
to say, that liberty and property are the birthright of the
english nation, but that if a prince invades them by illegal me-
thods, we must upon no pretence resist, is to confound co-
to hatch the seasons in a timely birth. dryden. vernments. 4.i.//en.
2. extraction; lineage. birt1stra's gleb. adj. [from birth and/orang!...] stranged
most virtuous virgin, born of heavenly birth. spensor. or suffocated in being born.
finger
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 260</div><p class="text">b i s
b i t
o
p. . o:o shakespeare's macbeth.
bi’rthwor t. n.s.. [from birth and wort; i o 3. ..
lity of hastening delivery. arslalochia, lat.] c nanne o
pox. n. s. [french.j a confection made of flour, sugar,
s. &amp;c. -
b.o.o. bis, twice, lat. and cuit, baked, fr.] .
1. a kind of hard dry o made to be carried to sea ; it is
or long voyages four times. -
o: ships, especially in the spanish gal-
lies, was grown hoary, and unwholesome. knolles'. hist.
many have been cured of dropsies by abstinence from drinks,
eating dry biscuit, which creates no thirst, and strong frictions
four or five times a day. arbuthnot on diet.
2. a composition of fine flour, almonds, and sugar, made by the
confectioners. - -
to bissect. v. a. [from binus and seco, to cut, lat.] to divide
into two parts. -
the rational horizon bisoleth the globe into two equal
parts. brown's pulgar errours.
bisection... n.f. [from the verb.] a geometrical term, signi-
fying the division of any quantity into two equal parts.
booß. n.s.. [from episcopus, lat. the saxons formed bircop,
which was afterwards softened into bishop.] one of the head
order of the clergy. - -
a bishop is an overseer, or superintendant, of religious mat-
ters in the christian church. ayliffe's parergon.
you shall find him well accompany’d
with reverend fathers, and well learned lishops. shakesp.
their zealous superstition thinks, or pretends, they cannot
do god a greater service, than to destroy the primitive, aposto-
lical, and anciently universal government of the church by
bishops. k. charles.
in case a bishop should commit treason and felony, and forfeit
his estate, with his life, the lands of his bishoprick remain still
in the church. south.
on the word bishop, in french eveque, i would observe, that
there is no natural connexion between the sacred office and the
letters or sound; for eveque, and bishop, signify the same office,
though there is not one letter alike in them. hatts's logick.
bi's hop. m. s. a cant word for a mixture of wine, oranges,
and sugar.
fine oranges,
well roasted, with sugar and wine in a cup,
they'll make a sweet bishop, when gentle folks sup. swift.
to b1's hop. v. a. [from the noun...] to confirm; to admit
solemnly into the church.
they are prophane, imperfeot, oh! too bad,
except confirm'd and bishoped by thee. donne.
bi's hop rick, n s. [bircopnice, saxon.] the diocese of a
bishop ; the district over which the jurisdiction of a bishop
extends.
it will be fit, that, by the king's supreme power in causes
ecclesiastical, they be subordinate under some bishop, and bi-
shoprick, of this realm. bacon's advice to piliers.
a virtuous woman should reject marriage, as a good man
does a bishoprick; but i would advise neither to perfist in re-
fusing. addison's spectator.
those pastors had episcopal ordination, possessed prefer-
ments in the church, and were sometimes promoted to bishop-
ricks themselves. swift's sentiments of a church of e. man.
bi's hopsw e3d. [ammi, lat.] the name of a plant.
bisk. m. s. [bisque, fr.] soup ; broth made by boiling several
sorts of flesh.
a prince, who in a forest rides astray,
and, weary, to some cottage finds the way,
talks of no pyramids, or fowls, or bisks of fish,
but hungry sups his cream serv'd up in earthen dish. king.
bl's ket. see biscuit.
bi's mut h. m. s. the same as marcaste; a hard, white, brittle,
mineral substance, of a metalline nature, found at misnia;
fupposed to be a recrementitious matter thrown off in the for.
mation of tin. some esteem it a metal sui generi; ; though
it usually contains some filver. there is an artificial bismuth
made, for the shops, of tin. &amp;uincy.
br'ssextile, n. s. [from bis and sixtilis, lat.] leap year;
the year in which the day, arising from fix odd hours in each
year, is intercalated.
the year of the sun consisteth of three hundred and sixty-
five days and fix hours, wanting eleven minutes; which fix
hours omitted, will, in time, deprave the compute; and this
was the occasion of bisextile or leap year. brown.
towards the latter end of february is the bisextile or inter-
solar day; called bisextile, because the fixth of the calends of
march is twice repeated. holder on time.
bi'ssos. adj. [derived by skinner from by and sin.] blind.
but who, oh! who hath seen the mobied queen,
run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
\o. rheum ? - - . shakespeare's hamlet.
*rm can your bison conspectuities glean out of this
character shakespeare's coriolanus,
brstre. n.f. [french.] a colour made of chimney footboiled,
and then diluted with water; used by painters in washing their
designs. trevoux,
bi'stort. m. s. [bishorta, lat.] the name of a plant called
also snakeweed ; which see. -
bi's rou ry. m. s. [bissouri, fr.] a surgeon's instrument used
in making incisions, of which there are three sorts; the blade of
the first turns like that of a lancet; but the straight bifloury has
the blade fixed in the handle; the crooked bisoury is shaped
like a half moon, having the edge on the inside. chamor,
bisu’lcous. adj. [bisulcus, lat..] clovenfooted.
for the swine, although multiparous, yet being bisukous,
and only clovenfooted, are farrowed with open eyes, as othes
bisukous animals. brown's pulgar erreur,
bit. n.s.. [bitol, saxon.] signifies the whole machine of all the
iron appurtenances of a bridle, as the bit-mouth, the branches,
the curb, the sevil holes, the tranchefil, and the cross chains;
but sometimes it is used to signify only the bit-mouth in par.
ticular. farrier's dia.
they light from their horses, pulling off their bit, that they
might something refresh their mouths upon the grass. sidney.
we have strict statutes, and most biting laws,
the needful bits and curbs of headstrong steeds. shaks).
he hath the bit between his teeth, and away he runs. sall.
unus’d to the restraint
of curbs and bits, and fleeter than the winds. addison.
bit. m. s. [from bite.]
1. as much meat as is put into the mouth at once.
how many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants
this night englutted shakespeare.
follow your function, go and batten on cold bits. soloff.
the mice found it troublesome to be still climbing the dik
for every bit they put in their bellies. l'estrange.
john was the darling; he had all the good bits, was cram-
med with good pullet, chicken, and capon. arbuthnot.
2. a small piece of anything.
by this the boiling kettle had prepar’d,
and to the table sent the smoaking lard,
a sav'ry bit, that serv'd to relish wine. dryden.
then clap four slices of pilaster on't,
that, lac'd with bi's of rustick, makes a front. pope.
he bought at thousands, what with better wit
you purchase as you want, and bit by bit. pope.
his majesty has power to grant a patent for stamping round
bits of copper, to every subject he bath. swift.
3. a spanish west indian silver coin, valued at sevenpence half-
enn v.
4. o, %. better or worse. in the smallest degree.
there are few that know all the tricks of these lawyers;
for aught i can see, your case is not a bit clearer than it was
seven years ago. arbuthnot.
to bit. v. a. [from the noun..] to put the bridle upon a
horse.
bitch. m. s. [bir;e, saxon.]
i. the female of the canine kind; as the wolf, the dog, the
fox, the otter.
and at his feet a bitch wolf suck did yield
to two young babes. sponsor.
i have been credibly informed, that a bitch will nurse, play
with, and be fond of young foxes, as much as, and in place
of her puppies. lock.
2. a name of reproach for a woman.
him you'll call a dog, and her a bitch. pope.
john had not run a madding so long, had it not been for
an extravagant bitch of a wife. arbuthnot.
73 bite. v. a. pret. i bit; part, pass. i have bit, or bitten,
[bitan, saxon.]
i. to crush, or pierce with the teeth.
my very enemy's dog,
though he had bit me, should have flood that night
against my fire. shakes eart,
such smiling rogues as these,
like rats, oft hite the holy cords in twain,
too intricate to unloose. shakesheare.
these are the youths that thunder at a playhouse, and figh
for bitten apples. shakespeare,
he falls; his arms upon his body sound,
and with his bloody teeth he bites the ground. dryden.
there was lately a young gentleman it to the bone, who
has now indeed recovered. tatler.
their foul mouths have not opened their lips without a fal-
sity; though they have showed their teeth as if they would lite
of my nose. arbuthnot and pope's mart. scrio.
2. to give pain by cold.
here feel we the icy phang,
and churlish chiding of the winter's wind;
which when it bites and blows upon my body,
ev’n till i shrink with cold, i smile. -
full fifty years harness'd in rugged steel,
i have endur'd the biting winter's blast,
and the severer heats of parching summer.
rowe's ambitious stepmother.
3. to
shak soare.
* cr
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 261</div><p class="text">b i t
b i t
o
*
:
:
*
&amp;
4. to cut; to wound.
5. to make the mouth smart with an acrid taste.
3. to hurt or pain with reproach.
each poet with a diff'rent talent writes;
one praises, one instructs, another bites. roscommon.
i’ve seen the day, with my good biting faulchion,
i would have made them skip.
it may be the first water will have more of the scent, as
more fragrant; and the second more of the taste, as more bit-
ter, or biting. bacon.
6. to cheat; to trick; to defraud: a low phrase.
asleep and naked as an indian lay,
an honest factor stole a gem away:
he pledg'd it to the knight; the knight had wit,
bilier is an equivocal word; there is bitter wormwood,
there are bitter words, there are bitter enemies, and a bitter
cold morning. j/atts's logi, ł.
biott ergour d. n.s.. [colocynthis, lat.] the name of a plant.
bitterly. adv. [from bitter.]
shakespeare. i.
2. in a bitter manner; sorrowfully; calamitously.
with a bitter taste.
i so lively acted with my tears,
that my poor mistress, moved therewithal,
wept bitterly. shakespeare.
bitterly hast thou paid, and still art paying
that rigid score. milton.
3. sharply ; severely.
his behaviour is not to censure bitterly the errours of their
so kept the diamond, and the rogue was bit. pope. zeal. spratt.
if you had allowed half the fine gentlemen to have converted bittern. m. s. shutour, fr.] a bird with long legs, and 4.
with you, they would have been strangely bit, while they long bill, which feeds upon fish; remarkable for the noise
thought only to fall in love with a fair lady. pope. which he makes, usually called bumping. see bittou r.
bite. n.s.. [from the verb.] the poor fish have enemies enough, besides such unnatural
1. the seizure of any thing by the teeth. fishermen as otters, the cormorant, and the bittern. if.../en.
does he think he can endure the everlasting burnings, so that scarce
or arm himself against the bites of the never-dying worm 2 the bittern knows his time, with bill ingulpht,
south. to shake the sounding marsh. thomson.
biott ern. m. s. [from bitter.] a very bitter liquor, which
are half so harmful as the greedy flocks; drains offin making of common salt, and used in the prepa-
their venom'd bite, and scars indented on the stocks. ration of epsom salt. &amp;uincy.
dryden's virgil's georgicks. bittern ess. n.s.. [from bitter.] * -
2. the aet of a fish that takes the bait. • 1. a bitter taste.
i have known a very good fisher angle diligently four or six the idea of whiteness, or bitterness, is in the mind, ex-
hours for a river carp, and not have a bite. //alton. actly answering that power which is in any body to pro-
3. a cheat; a trick; a fraud: in low and vulgar language. duce it there. locke.
let a man be ne'er so wise, 2. malice; grudge ; hatred ; implacability.
he may be caught with sober lies; the bitterns; and animosity between the commanders was
nor dogdays parching heat, that splits the rocks,
for take it in its proper light, such, that a great part of the army was marched. clarend:n.
'tis just what coxcombs call a bite. swift. 3. sharpness; severity of temper.
4. a sharper; one who commits frauds. his sorrows have so overwhelm'd his wits,
b1"r er. n.s.. [from bite.] shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks,
1. he that bites. his fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness? shakespeare.
great barkers are no biters. camden. pierpoint and crew appeared now to have contracted more
2. a fish apt to take the bait. bitternes, and sournef than formerly, and were more reserved
he is so bold, that he will invade one of his own kind, and towards the king's commissioners. carendon.
you may therefore easily believe him to be a bold biter. walt. 4. satire ; piquancy; keenness of reproach.
3. a tricker; a deceiver. some think their wits have been asleep, except they dart out
a biter is one who tells you a thing, you have no reason to somewhat piquant, and to the quick: men ought to find the
disbelieve in itself, and perhaps has given you, before he bit difference between saltness and bitterness. bacon.
you, no reason to disbelieve it for his saying it; and, if you 5. sorrow; vexation; affliction.
give him credit, laughs in your face, and triumphs that he has there appears much joy in him, even so much, that joy
deceived you. he is one who thinks you a fool, because you could not show itself modest enough, without a badge of bit-
do not think him a knave. spectator. terness. shakespeare.
bittacle. n.s. a frame of timber in the steerage of a ship, hey shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only
where the compass is placed. . . die?. son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in hit-
bitten. particip. pass. [from to bite; which see.] ternes; for his first-born. zech.
bitter. adj. [biten, saxon.] most pursue the pleasures, as they call them, of their na-
1. having a hot acrid, biting taste, like wormwood.
bitter things are apt rather to kill than engender putrefac-
tion. bacon’s nat. his?.
though a man in a fever should, from sugar, have a bitter
taste, which, at another time, produces a sweet one; yet the
idea of bitter, in that man’s mind, would be as distinct from
the idea of sweet, as if he had tasted only gall. locke.
2. sharp; cruel; severe.
rriends now fast sworn,
unseparable, shall within this hour,
on a callension of a doit, break out
to bitteres enmity. t shakespeare.
husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them.
coloss.
the word of god, instead of a bitter, teaches us a chari-
table zcal. spratt.
3. calamitous; miserable.
noble friends and fellows, whom to leave
is only bitter to me, only dying;
go with me, like good angels, to my end. shakesp.
a dire induction am i witness to ;
and will to france, hoping the consequence
will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. shakespeare.
and shun the bitter consequence: for know,
the day thou eat'st thereof, my sole command
transgrest, inevitably thou shalt die. paradise loft.
tell him, that if i bear my bitter fate, -
'tis to behold his vengeance for my son. dryden.
4. painful; inclement.
the fowl the borders fly,
and shun the bitter blast, and wheel about the sky. dryden.
5. sharp; reproachful; satirical.
go with me,
and, in the breath of bitter words, let’s smother
my damned son. shakespeare.
6. mournful ; afflicted.
wherefore is light given unto him that is in misery, and
life unto the bitter in soul ? job.
7. loy * unpleasing or hurtful. 4.
ol. i.
tures, which begin in fin, are carried on with danger, and
end in bitterness. j/ake.
i off, in bitternes of soul, deplor'd
my absent daughter, and my dearer lord. pope.
biott ersweet. n.s.. [from bitter and sweet.] the name of
an apple, which has a compound taste of sweet and bitter.
it is but a bittersweet at best, and the fine colours of the
serpent do by no means make amends for the smart and poison
of his sting. south.
when i express the taste of an apple, which we call the
bittersweet, none can mistake what i mean. j/atts.
b1't ter vetch. n. s. servum, lat..] a plant.
bitter wort. m. s. gentiana, lat..] an herb.
biotto ur. m. s. shutour, fr. ardea slellaris.] the name of
a bird, commonly called the bittern; [see bitternj but per-
haps as properly bittaur.
then to the waters brink she laid her head;
and, as a bittour bumps within a reed,
to thee alone, o lake, she said, i tell. dryden.
bitu'me. m. s. [from bitumen.] bitumen. see bitu men.
mix with these
idaean pitch, quick sulphur, silver's spume,
sca onion, hellebore, and black bitume. may.
bitu'men. n. s. [lat..] a fat unetuous matter dug out of
the earth, or scummed off lakes, as the asphaltis in judaea, of
various kinds; some so hard as to be used for coals; others so
glutinous as to serve for mortar. savary.
it is reported, that bitumen mingled with lime, and put under
water, will make as it were an artificial rock, the substance
becometh so hard. bacon.
the fabrick seem'd a work of rising ground,
with sulphur and bitumen cast between. dryden.
bitumen is a body that rcadily takes fire, yields an oil, and
is soluble in water. //oodward.
bitu'minous, adj. [from bitumen.] having the nature and
qualities of bitumen; compounded of bitumen.
naphtha, which was the bituminous mortar used in the walls
of babylon, grows to an entire and very hard matter, like a
stone. bacon.
3 d the
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 262</div><p class="text">b l a
b l a
the fruitage fair to fight, like that which grew
near that bituminous lake, where sodom flam'd. milton.
biv alv e. adj. [from linus and valvac, lat.] having two
valves or shutters; a term used of those fish that have two
shells, as oysters; and of those plants whose seed pods open
their whole length, to discharge their seeds, as peas.
in the cavity lies loose the shell of some sort of bivalve, lar-
ger than could be introduced in at those holes. j/oodward.
biv a'lvul.a. adj. [from bivalve..] having two valves. die?.
bi’kwor t. n.s. an herb. dici.
bi'zant in e. n.s.. [more properly spelt byzantine; from byzan-
tium.] a great piece of gold valued at fifteen pound, which
the king offereth upon high festival days; it is yet called
a bizantihe, which anciently was a piece of gold coined by
the emperours of constantinople. camden.
to blab. v. a. [blabberen, dutch.] -
1. to tell what ought to be kept secret; it usually implies rather
thoughtlessness than treachery; but may be used in either sense.
the gaudy, blabling, and remorseful day,
is crept into the bosom of the sea.
thy dues be done, and none left out,
ere the blabbing eastern scout,
the nice morn on the indian steep,
from her cabin'd loophole peep.
nature has made man's breast no windores,
to publish what he does within doors;
nor what dark secrets there inhabit,
unless his own rash folly blab it.
sorrow nor joy can be disguis’d by art,
our foreheads blab the secrets of our heart. dryden.
it is unlawful to give any kind of religious worship to a crea-
ture; but the very indices of the fathers cannot escape the in-
shakespeare.
milton.
hudibras.
dex expurgatorius, for blabbing so great a truth. stillingfieet.
nor whisper to the tattling reeds
the blackest of all female deeds;
nor blab it on the lonely rocks,
where echo fits, and list'ning mocks. swift.
2. to tell; in a good sense: not used.
that delightful engine of her thoughts,
that blabb'd them with such pleasing eloquence,
is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage. shakespears.
to elab. v. n. to tattle; to tell tales.
your mute i’ll be ;
when my tongue babs, then let mine eyes not see. shakes?.
blab. n.s.. [from the verb.] a telltale; a thoughtless babbler;
a treacherous betrayer of secrets.
the secret man heareth many confessions; for who will
open himself to a blab, or thbbler bacon.
to have reveal’d
secrets of man, the secrets of a friend,
contempt and scorn of all, to be excluded
all friendship, and avoided as a blab. milion.
whoever shews me a very inquisitive body, i'll shew him a
blab, and one that shall make privacy as publick as a procla-
mation. l'estrange.
i should have gone about shewing my letters, under the
charge of secrecy, to cvery blab of my acquaintance. swift.
bla(bber. m. s. [from blab.] a tatler; a telltale.
to bla bber. v. n. to whistle to a horse. skinner.
bla(bbfrlippe d. skinner. see blob berlipped.
black. adj. [blac, saxon.]
1. of the colour of night.
in the twilight in the evening, in the black and dark night.
proverbs.
aristotle has problems which enquire why the sun makes
man black, and not the fire; why it whitens wax, yet blacks
the skin brown.
2. dark.
the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was
a great rain. 1 kings.
3. cloudy of countenance; sullen.
she hath abated me of half my train;
look'd black upon me.
4. horrible ; wicked; atrocious.
either my country never must be freed,
shakespeare.
or i consenting to so black a deed. dryden.
5. dismal; mournful.
a dire induction am i witness to ;
and will to france, hoping the consequence
will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. shakespeare.
6. black and blue. the colour of a bruise; a stripe.
mistress ford, good heart, is beaten black and blue, that you
cannot see a white spot about her. merry i/ives of windsor.
and, wing'd with speed and fury, flew
to rescue knight from black and blue. hudibras.
black-brow ed. adj. [from black and brow.] having black
eyebrows; gloomy; dismal; threatening.
come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night,
give me my romeo. shakespeare.
thus when a black-brow'd gust begins to rise,
white foam at first on the curl’d ocean fries,
then roars the main, the billows mount the skies. dryden.
black-bryon y. n.s. stamnus, lat.] the name of a plant.
black-cattle. oxen, bulls, and cows.
the other part of the grazier's business is what we call
black-cattle, produces hides, tallow, and beef, for exportation.
swift.
black-earth. n.s. it is every where obvious on the is:
of the ground, and what we call mould. //codward.
black-guard. adj. [from black and guard.] a cant word
amongst the vulgar; by which is implied a dirty fellow; of
the meanest kind.
let a black-guard boy be always about the house, to send on
your errands, and go to market for you on rainy days. swift.
black-lead. m. s. [from black and lead..] a mineral found in
the lead-mines, much used for pencils; it is not fusible, or
not without a very great heat.
you must first get your black-lead sharpened finely, and put
fast into quills, for your rude and first draught. peachara.
black-mail. m. s. a certain rate of money, corn, cattle, or
other consideration, paid to men allied with robbers, to be
by them protected from the danger of such as usually rob or
steal. cowel.
black-pud d1ng. m. s. [from block and pudding.] a kind of
food made of blood and grain.
through they were lin'd with many a piece
of ammunition bread and cheese,
and fat blackpuddings, proper food
for warriours that delight in blood. hudibrar.
black-rod. n.s. [from black and rod..] the usher belonging
to the order of the garter; so called from the black red he car-
ries in his hand. he is of the king's chamber, and likewise
usher of the parliament. czwe.
black. n.s.. [from the adjective.]
1. a black colour.
black is the badge of hell,
the hue of dungeons, and the scowl of night. shake? care.
for the production of black, the corpuscles must be less than
any of those which exhibit colours. newton.
2. mourning.
rise, wretched widow, rise; nor, undeplor’d,
permit my ghost to pass the stygian ford:
but rise, prepar'd in black, to mourn thy perish'd lord. dryd.
3. a blackamoor.
4. that part of the eye which is black.
it suffices that it be in every part of the air, which is as big
as the black or fight of the eye. digby.
to black. v. a. [from the noun j to make black; to blacken.
blacking over the paper with ink, not only the ink would be
quickly dried up, but the paper, that i could not burn before,
we quickly set on fire. boyle-
then in his fury black'd the raven o'er,
and bid him prate in his white plumes no more. addison.
bla'ck amoor. m. s. [from black and moor.] a man by nature
of a black complexion; a negro.
they are no more afraid of a blackamoor, or a lion, than of
a nurse, or a cat. locke-
blackberried heath. [empetrum, lat.] the name of a plant.
bla’ck be rry bush. m. s. [rubus, lat..] a species of bramble.
blackberry. n.s. the fruit of the blackberry bush.
the policy of these crafty sneering rascals, that stale old
mouse-eaten cheese nestor, and that same dogfox ulysses, is
not proved worth a blackberry. shakespeare.
then sad he sung the children in the wood;
how blackberries they pluck'd in desarts wild,
and fearless at the glittering fauchion smil’d. gay-
bla'ckbird. n.s.. [from black and bird..] the name of a bird.
of singing birds, they have linnets, goldfinches, blackbirds,
thrushes, and divers others. carew.
a schoolboy ran unto’t, and thought
the crib was down, the blackbird caught. sws?.
to blacken. v. a. [from black.]
i. to make of a black colour.
bless'd by aspiring winds, he finds the strand
blacken'd by crowds.
while the long fun'rals blacken all the way.
2. to darken; to cloud.
that little cloud that appear'd at first to elijah's servant, no
bigger than a man's hand, but presently after grew, and spread,
and blackened the face of the whole heavcn. south.
3. to defame; or make infamous. -
let us blacken him what we can, said that miscreant har-
rison, of the blessed king, upon the wording and drawing up
prior.
pope.
his charge against his approaching trial. south.
the morals blacken'd, when the writings 'scape,
the libell'd person, and the pictur'd shape. pope.
to black en. v. n. to grow black, or dark.
the hollow sound
sung in the leaves, the forest shook around,
air blacken'd, roll'd the thunder, groan'd the ground. dryas.
bla’ckish. adj. [from black.] somewhat black. -
part of it all the year continues in the form of a blackish
oil. boyle.
blackmoor. m. s. [from black and moor.] a negro. t
he
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 263</div><p class="text">b l a
b l a
o
o
}*
i.
..
the land of chus makes no part of africa; nor is it the
habitation of blackmoors; but the country of arabia, especially
the happy and stony. brown's /ugar errours.
more to west
the realm of bacchus to the blackmoor sea.
milon.
pla’ ckn ess. m. s. [from black.]
1. black colour.
blackness is only a disposion to absorb, or stifle, without
reflection; most of the rays of every sort that fall on the
bodies. locke.
there would emerge one or more very black spots, and,
within those, other spots of an intenser blackness. newton.
his tongue, his prating tongue, had chang'd him quite,
to sooty blackness from the purest white. addison.
2. darkness.
his faults in him seem as the spots of heav'n,
more fiery by night's blackness. shakespeare.
3. atrociousness; horribleness; wickedness.
blacks mit h. n.s. [from black and smith..] a smith that works
in iron ; so called from being very snutty.
the blacksmith may forge what he pleases. howel.
shut up thy doors with bars and bolts; it will be impossible
for the blacksmith to make them so fast, but a cat and a whore-
master will find a way through them. speciator.
bla'cktail. m. s. [from black and tail.] a fish ; a kind of
perch, by some called ruff, or popes. see pop e. i)i&amp;#.
black's horn. n.s.. [from black and thorn.] the same with
the sloe. see plum, of which it is a species.
bla'd der. m. s. [blabbre, saxon ; blader, dutch..]
1. that vessel in the body which contains the urine.
the bladder should be made of a membranous substance,
and extremely dilatable for receiving and containing the urine,
till an opportunity of emptying it. ray.
2. it is often filled with wind, to which allusions are frequently
made.
that huge great body which the giant bore,
was vanquish d quite, and of that monstrous mass
was nothing left, but like an empty bladder was. spensor.
a bladder but moderately filled with air, and strongly tied,
being held near the fire, grew exceeding turgid and hard; but
being brought nearer to the fire, it suddenly broke, with so
loud a noise as made us for a while after almost deaf. boyle.
. it is usual for those that learn to swim, to support themselves
with blown bladders.
i have ventur'd,
like little wanton boys, that swim on bladders,
these many summers, in a sea of glory;
but far beyond my depth : my highblown pride
at length broke under me.
4. a blister; a pustule.
blas dder-nut. n. j., [staphylodendron, lat.] a plant.
bla(pper-sen a. m. s. [colutea, lat..] the name of a plant.
blade. n.f. [blab, bleb, sax. bled, fr.] the spire of grass
before it grows to seed; the green shoots of corn which rise
from the seed. this seems to me the primitive signification of
the word blade; from which, i believe, the blade of a sword
was first named, because of its similitude in shape; and, from
the blade of a sword, that of other weapons or tools.
there is hardly found a plant that yieldeth a red juice in the
blade or ear, except it be the tree that beareth sanguis draco-
mis. bacon.
send in the feeding flocks betimes, t' invade
the rising bulk of the luxuriant blade. dryden.
if we were able to dive into her secret recesses, we should
find that the smallest blade of grass, or most contemptible
shakespeare.
weed, has its particular use. swift.
hung on every spray, on every blade
of grass, the myriad dewdrops twinkle round. thomson.
blade. n.s.. [blatte, germ. blad, dutch.]
1. the sharp or striking part of a weapon or instrument, distinet
from the handle. it is usually taken for a weapon, and so
called probably from the likeness of a sword blade to a blade
of grass. it is commonly applied to the knife.
he sought all round about, his thirsty blade
to bathe in blood of faithless enemy. fairy queen.
she knew the virtue of her blade, nor would
pollute her sabre with ignoble blood. dryden.
be his this sword, whose blade of brass displays
a ruddy gleam ; whose hilt a silver blaze. pope.
2. a brisk man, either fierce or gay, called so in contempt. so
we say mettle for courage.
you'll find yourself mistaken, sir, if you'll take upon you to
judge of these blades by their garbs, looks, and outward appear-
as cc. l’estrange.
then turning about to the hangman, he said,
dispatch me, 1 pri'thee, this troublesome blade. prior.
blade of the shoulder. }% the bone called by anatomists the
blade bone. scapula, or scapular bone.
he fell most furiously on the broiled relicks of a shoulder of
mutton, commonly called a bladebone. pope.
to blade. v. a. [from the noun..] to furnish, or fit with a
blade.
bla'ded. adj. [from blade.] having blades or spires.
her silver visage in the wat'ry glass,
decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass. shakesp.
as where the light'ning runs along the ground,
nor bladed grass, nor bearded corn succeeds,
but scales of scurf and putrefaction breeds. dryden.
blain. m. s. [ble gene, sax. blayne, dutch..] a pustule; a botch;
a blister.
itches, blains,
sow all th’ athenian bosoms, and the crop
be general leprosy. shakespeare.
botches and blains must all his flesh imboss,
and all his people. milton.
whene’er i hear a rival nam’d,
i feel my body all inflam'd ;
which breaking out in boils and blains,
with yellow filth my linen stains.
bla'mable, adj. [from blame.) culpable; faulty.
virtue is placed between two extremes, which are on both
sides equally blamable. drydon.
bla'ma blen ess. n.s. (from blamable.] fault; the state of be-
ing liable to blame; culpableness ; faultiness.
bla mably. adv. [from blamable.] culpably ; in a manner
liable to censure.
a process may be carried on against a person, that is mali-
ciously or blamally absent, even to a definitive sentence. ayloft.
to blame. v. a. [blimer, fr.]
1. to censure ; to charge with a fault: it generally implies a
slight censure.
swift.
our pow'r
shall do a court’sy to our wrath, which men
may blame, but not controul.
porphyrius, you too far did tempt your fate;
'tis true, your duty to me it became ;
shak speare.
but praising that, i must your conduct blame. dryden.
each finding, like a friend,
something to blame, and something to commend. pope.
2. to blame has usually the particle for before the fault.
the reader must not blame me for making use here all along
of the word sentiment. locke.
3. sometimes, but rarely, of:
tomoreus he blam'd of inconsiderate rashness, for that he
would busy himself in matters not belonging to his vocation.
knolley's hyłory of the turks.
bla m.e. m. s. [from the verb.]
i. imputation of a fault.
in arms, the praise of success is shared among many ; yet
the blame of misadventures is charged upon one. hayward.
they lay the blame on the poor little ones, sometimes pas-
sionately enough, to divert it from themselves. locke.
2. crime ; that which produces or deserves censure.
who would not judge us to be discharged of all blame,
which are confest to have no great fault, even by their very
word and testimony, in whose eyes no fault of ours hath ever
hitherto been accustomed to seem small. hooker.
i unspeak mine own detraction: here abjure
the taints and blames i laid upon myself,
for strangers to my nature. shakos care.
not now in use.
therewith upon his crest,
with rigour so outrageous he smit,
that a large share it hew'd out of the rest,
and glancing down his shield, from blame him fairly blesł.
- fairy 3:1een.
4. there is a peculiar structure of this word, in which it is not
very evident whether it be a noun or a verb, but i conceive it
to be the noun. to blame, in french, a tort; culpable; wor-
thy of censure.
you were to blame, i must be plain with you,
to part so slightly with your wife's first gift. shakesp.
i do not ask whether they were mistaken; but, whether
3. hurt.
they were to blame in the manner stillingfeet.
now we should hold them much to blame,
if they went back before they came. prior.
bla’meful. adv. [from blame and full.] criminal; guilty;
meriting blame.
is not the causer of these timeless deaths
as blameful as the executioner shakespeare.
bluntwitted lord, ignoble in demeanour,
if ever lady wrong'd her lord so much,
thy mother took into her blamosul bed
some stern untutor'd churl. shakespeare.
bla’me less. adj. [from blame.]
1. guiltless; innocent; exempt from censure or blame.
she found out the righteous, and preserved him blameles;
unto god. // isdom, x. 5.
the flames ascend on either altar clear,
while thus the llameless maid address'd her pray’r. dryden.
such a lessening of our coin will deprive great numbers of
blameless men of a fifth part of their estates. locke.
2. sometimes it is used with of.
we will be blamels of this thine oath. joshua, ii. 17.
bla'ms-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 264</div><p class="text">b l a
b l a
bla’melesly. adv, [from blameless.]
crime.
it is the wilful opposing explicit articles, and not the not
believing them when not revealed, or not with that conviction,
against which he cannot blamelesy, without pertinacy, hold out,
that will bring danger of ruin on any. hammond.
bla'meles n ess. n.j. [from blameless.] innocence; exemp-
tion from censure.
having resolved, with him in homer, that all is chargeable
on jupiter and fate, they infer, with him, the blamelessnes of
the inferiour agent. hammand.
blas m.e.r. n.s. [from blame.] one that blames or finds fault ;
a censurer.
in me you've hallowed a pagan muse,
and denizon'd a stranger, who mistaught
by llamers of the times they marr'd, hath sought
virtues in corners. donne.
blame wo'rthy. adj. [from blame and worthy..] culpable ;
blameable; worthy of blame or censure.
although the same should be blameworthy, yet this age hath
forborn to incur the danger of any such blame. hooker.
to blanch. v. a. [blanchir, fr.]
1. to whiten; to change from some other colour to white.
you can behold such sights,
and keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,
when mine is blanch'd with fear. shakespeare.
a way of whiting wax cheaply may be of use; and we
have set down the practice of tradesmen who blanch it. boyle.
and fin's black dye seems blanch'd by age to virtue.
dryden.
innocently ; without
2. to strip or peel such things as have husks.
their suppers may be bisket, raisins of the sun, and a few
blanched almonds. joseman.
3. to slur ; to balk; to pass over; to shift away. not now
in use.
the judges thought it dangerous to admit iss and ands, to
qualify treason; whereby every one might express his malice,
and blanch his danger. bacon.
you are not transported in an action that warms the blood
and is appearing holy, to blanch, or take for admitted, the point
of lawfulness. bacon.
to blanch. v. n. to evade; to shift; to speak soft.
optimi consiliarii mortui ; books will speak plain, when coun-
sellors blanch. bacon.
bla'nch er. m.s.. [from blanch..] . a whitener. diet.
bland. adj. [blandus, lat.] soft ; mild; gentle.
in her face excuse
came prologue; and apology too prompt;
which, with bland words at will, she thus address'd. milt.
an even calm
perpetual reign'd, save what the zephyrs bland
breath'd o'er the blue expanse. thomson.
to bla(ndis h. v. a. [blandior, lat.] to smooth; to soften.
i have met with this word in no other passage.
must’ring all her wiles,
with blandish'd parleys, feminine assaults,
tongue-batteries, she surceas'd not day nor night,
to storm me over-watch'd, and weary'd out.
bla'n dishment. n.s.. [from blandsh; blanditia, lat.]
1. act of fondness ; expression of tenderness by gesture.
the little babe up in his arms he hent,
who, with sweet pleasure and bold blandishment,
milton.
"gan smile. spensor.
each bird and beast, behold
approaching two and two; these cow'ring low
with blandishment. milton.
2. soft words; kind speeches.
he was both well and fair spoken, and would use strange
fweetness and blandishment of words, where he desired to ef-
fe&amp;t or persuade anything that he took to heart. bacon.
3. kind treatment; caress.
him lido now with blandis' ment detains;
but i suspect the town where juno reigns. dryden.
in order to bring those infidels within the wide circle of
whiggish community, neither blandishments nor promises are
omitted. swift.
blank. adj. [blanc, fr. derived by menage from albianus, thus:
albianus, albianicus, bianicus, biancus, bianco, blanicus, blancus,
blanc ; by others, from blanc, which, in danish, signifies shin-
ing ; in conformity to which, the germans have blancker, to
/hine; the saxons, blaccan ; and the english, bleach, to whiten.]
1. white.
to the blank moon
her office they prescrib'd : to th' other five
their planetary motions.
2. without writing; unwritten; empty of all marks.
our substitutes at home shall have blank charters,
whereto, when they know that men are rich,
they shall subscribe them for large sums of gold.
shakespeare.
upon the debtor side, i find innumerable articles; but, upon
the creditor side, little more than blank paper. addison.
milton.
3. pale; confused; crushed; dispirited; subdued; depressed.
there without such boast, or sign of joy,
solicitous and blank, he thus began. alfi.ltzn.
adam soon as he heard
the fatal trespass done by eve, amaz'd,
aftonied stood, and blank, while horrour chill
ran through his veins, and all his joints relax’d. milton.
but now no face divine cententment wears;
'tis all blank sadness, or continual fears. pope.
4. without rhyme; where the rhyme is blanched, or missed.
the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for it. shakespeare.
long have your ears been fill'd with tragick parts;
blood and blank verse have harden'd all your hearts. adds.
our blank verse, where there is no rhyme to support the ex-
pression, is extremely difficult to such as are not masters in the
tongue. addison.
blank. m. s. [from the adjective.]
1. a void space on paper.
i cannot write a paper full as i used to do; and yet i will
not forgive a blank of half an inch from you. swift.
2. a lot, by which nothing is gained; which has no prize mark-
ed upon it.
if you have heard your general talk of rome,
and of his friends there, it is lots to blanks
my name hath touch'd your cars.
in fortune's lottery lies
a heap of blanks, like this, for one small prize.
the world the coward will despise,
when life’s a blank, who pulls not for a prize.
3. a paper from which the writing is effaced.
she has left him
the blank of what he was ;
i tell thee, eunuch, she has quite unmann'd him. droon.
4. a paper unwritten ; any thing without marks or characters.
for him, i think not on him; for his thoughts,
would they were blanks, rather than fill'd with me.
shakespears.
dryden.
dryder.
shakespeare.
omission to do what is necessary,
seals a commission to a blank of danger. shakespeare.
for the book of knowledge fair,
presented with an universal blank
of nature's works, to me expung’d and ras'd. milton.
life may be one great blank, which, though not blotted
with fin, is yet without any characters of grace or virtue.
rogers.
5. the point to which an arrow is directed; so called, because,
to be more visible, it was marked with white. now disused.
siander,
whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
as level as the cannon to his blank,
transports its poison'd shot.
6. aim ; shot. not used.
the harlot king
is quite beyond my aim ; out of the blank
and level of my brain.
i have spoken for you all my best,
and stood within the blank of his displeasure,
for my free speech.
7. object to which any thing is directed.
see better, lear, and let me still remain
the true blank of thine eye.
to b: ank. v. a. [from blank; blanchir, fr.]
1. to damp; to confuse ; to dispirit.
each opposite, that blanks the face of joy,
meet what i would have well, and it destroy. shakstare.
dagon must stoop, and shallere long receive
such a discomfit, as shall quite despoil him
of all these boasted trophies won on me,
and with confusion blank his worshippers. milton.
if the atheist, when he dies, should find that his soul re-
mains, how will this man be amazed and blanked p tillotson.
2. to efface; to annul.
all former purposes were blanked, the governour at a bay,
and all that charge lost and cancelled. spenser.
blanket. n. s. [blanchette, fr.]
1. a woollen cover, soft, and loosely woven, spread commonly
upon a bed, over the linen sheet, for the procurement of
warmth.
nor heav'n peep through the blanket of the dark,
to cry, hold ' hold ! shakespeare.
the abilities of man must fall short on one side or other, like
too scanty a blanket when you are a-bed; if you pull it upon
your shoulders, you leave your feet bare; if you thrust it down
upon your feet, your shoulders are uncovered. temple.
himself among the storied chiefs he spies,
as from the blanket high in air he flies. pop.
2. a kind of pear, sometimes written banquet.
to bla'nket. w.a. [from the noun.]
1. to cover with a blanket.
my face i'll grime with filth;
blanket my loins; tie all my hair in knots.
shakspeare.
shakoff care.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
2. to
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 265</div><p class="text">b l a
b l a
*
o
t
2. to toss in a blanket, by way of penalty or contempt.
ah, oh! he cry’d, what street, what lane, but knows
our purgings, pumpings, blanketings, and blows pope.
bla'nkly. adv. [from blank j. in a blank manner; with white-
ness; with paleness; with confusion.
to rlare. v. n. [blaren, dutch..] to bellow; to roar. skinner.
to blasphe'me. v. a. [blasphemo, low lat.)
1. to speak in terms of impious irreverence of god.
2. to speak evil of.
the truest issue of thy throne,
by his own interdiction stands accurs'd,
and does blospheme his breed. shakespeare.
those who from our labours heap their board,
blast heme their feeder, and forget their lord. pope.
to blas phe me. v. n. to speak blasphemy.
liver of blaspheming jew. shakespeare.
i punished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled them
to blaspheme. acis.
blas phe mer. m. s. [from biospheme.] a wretch that speaks
of god in impious and irreveient terms.
who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and inju- .
rious. 1 timothy.
even that blasphemer himself would inwardly reverence his
reprover, as he in his heart really despises him for his coward-
ly base filence. south.
deny the curst blos homer's tongue to rage,
and turn god's fury from an impious age. tickell.
should each blasphemer quite escape the rod,
because the insult's not to man, but god. pope.
bla's ph e mous. adj. [from blaspheme. it is usually spoken with
the accent on the first syllable, but used by milton with it on
the second..] impiously irreverent with regard to god.
o man, take heed how thou the gods do move,
to cause full wrath, which thou can't not resist;
bloff honous words the speaker vain do prove. sidney.
and dar'st thou to the son of god propound,
to worship thee accurst; now more accurst
for this attempt, bolder than that on eve,
and more blasphemous * milton.
a man can hardly pass the streets, without having his ears
grated with horrid and blasphemous oaths and curses. tillotson.
that any thing that wears the name of a christian, or but of
man, should venture to own such a villainous, impudent, and
blasphemous assertion in the face of the world, as this south.
bla's phe mous ly. adv. [from blospheme.] impiously; with
wicked irreverence.
where is the right use of his reason, while he would blas-
phemously set up to controul the commands of the almighty
swift.
bla's phemy. m. s. [from blaspheme.] if
blasphemy, strictly and properly, is an offering of some in-
dignity, or injury, unto god himself, either by words or
writing. ajliffe.
but that my heart's on future mischief set,
i would speak blasphemy, ere bid you fly ;
but fly you must. shakespeare.
intrinsick goodness consists in accordance, and fin in contra-
riety, to the secret will of god; or else god could not be de-
fined good, so far as his thoughts and secrets, but only superfi-
cially good, as far as he is pleased to reveal himself, which is
perfeot blasphemy to imagine. hammond.
blast, n. s. [from blaro, sax. blason, germ. to blow.]
1. a gust or puff of wind.
they that stand high, have many blas's to shake them;
and, if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces. shakesp.
welcome, then,
thou unsubstantial air, that i embrace;
the wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst,
owes nothing to thy bloss. shakespeare.
perhaps thy fortune doth controul the winds,
doth loose or bind their blosis in secret cave.
three ships were hurry'd by the southern blast,
and on the secret shelves with fury cast. dryden.
2. the sound made by blowing any instrument of wind musick,
in peace there's nothing so becomes a man,
as modest stilness and humility;
but when the blast of war blows in our ears,
fairfax.
then imitate the action of the tyger. shakespeare.
he blew his trumpet—the angelick blast
fill'd all the regions. milton.
the veline fountains, and sulphureous nar,
shake at the baleful bias, the signal of the war. dryden.
whether there be two different goddesses called fame, or
one goddess sounding two different trumpets, it is certain, vil-
lainy has as good a title to a blo/? from the proper trumpet, as
virtue has from the former. swift.
3. the stroke of a malignant planet; the inscetion of any thing
pestilential: from the verb so baff.
by the blost of god they perish. job.
to blast. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to strike with some sudden plague or calamity.
vol. 1.
you nimble lightnings, dart your blin fing flames
into her scornful eyes | infect her beauty,
you fensuck'd fogs, drawn by the powerful fun,
to fall and blast her pride. siaospeare.
oh! portius, is there not some chosen curse,
some hidden thunder in the store of heaven,
red with uncommon wrath, to bas? the man,
who owes his greatness to his country's ruin a.'ss it.
2. to make to wither. -
upon this baled heath you stop our way. shoe?, are.
and behold seven thin ears, and b afted with the east wind,
sprung up after them. - genesis.
she that like lightning shin'd, while her face lasted,
the oak now resembles, which lightning had bladel. if...i.
to his green years your censures you would suit,
not blost that blossom, but expect the fruit. dry lin.
agony unmix'd, incellant gall
corroding every thought, and loy?ing all
love's paradise. tomson.
3. to injure; to invalidate; to make infamous.
he shews himself weak, if he will take my word, when
he thinks i deserve no credit; or malicious, if he knows i
deserve credit, and yet goes about to blo it. stion of et. .
4. to cut off; to hinder from coming to maturity. -
this commerce, jehoshaphat king of judea endeavoured to
renew ; but his enterprize was boosted by the destruction of
vessels in the harbour. arbuthnot.
5. to confound 5 to strike with terrour.
trumpeters,
with brazen din, blast you the city’s ears;
make mingle with your ratt'ling tabourines. shakes.
b la's tment. m. s. [from blast.] blast ; sudden stroke of in-
fection. not now in use.
in the morn, and liquid dew of youth,
contagious blastments are most imminent. shakspeare.
blat ant. adj. [blattant, fr.] bellowing as a calf.
you learn'd this language from the batant beast.
to blatter. v. n. [from blatero, lat.] to roar; to make
a senseless noise. it is a word not now used.
she rode at peace, through his only pains and excellent en-
durance, however envy list to blatter against him. spenser.
blatteration. n.s.. [blatteratio, lat. j noise; sens less roar.
blay. n.s.. [alburnus.] a small white river fish; called also a
bleak.
blaze. m. s. [blare, a torch, saxon.]
1. a flame ; the light of the flame: blaze implies more the light
than the heat.
—the main blaze of it is past; but a small thing would
make it flame again. shakespeare', c., icianus.
thy throne is darkness in th’ abyss of light,
a blaze of glory that forbids the fight.
what groans of men shall fill the martial field !
how fierce a blaze his flaming pile shall yield !
what fun'ral pomp shall floating tiber feel
2. publication ; wide diffusion of report.
for what is glory but the blaze of fame, -
the people's praise, if always praise unmixt? milon.
3. blaze is a white mark upon a horse, descending from the fore-
head almost to the nose. farrier's lich.
to blaze. v. n. [srom the noun.]
1. to flame; to snew the light of the flame.
thus you may long live an happy instrument for your king
and country; you shall not be a meteor, or a bi zing star, but
fiella fixa; happy here, and more happy hereafter. bacon.
the third fair morn now blaz'd upon the main,
then glossy smooth lay all the liquid plain. pope.
2. to be conspicuous.
to blaze. v. a.
1. to publish; to make known; to spread far and wide.
the noise of this fight, and issue thereof, being blazed by
the country people to some noblemen thereabouts, they came
dryden.
dryden,
dryden.
thither. - sidney.
my words, in hopes to blaze a stedfast mind,
this marble chose, as of like temper known. sidney.
thou shalt live, till we can find a time
to blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
beg pardon of thy prince, and call thee back. shakoff care.
when beggars die, there are no comets seen ;
the heav'ns themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
shakespeare.
but he went out, and began to publish it much, and to
blaze abroad the matter. 41ark.
such musick worthiest were to blaze
the peerless height of her immortal praise,
whose luttre leads us. aotor.
far beyond
the sons of anak, famous now and bluz'd,
fearless of danger, like a petty god
i walk’d about. a sistan.
whose follies, blaz'd about, to all are known,
and are a secret to himself alone. granville.
3 e. - but,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 266</div><p class="text">b l e
but, mortals, know, 'tis still our greatest pride
to blaze those virtues which the good would hide. pope.
2. to blazon; to give an account of ensigns armorial in proper
terms. this is not now used.
this, in ancient times, was called a fierce; and you should
then have blazed it thus: he bears a fierce, sable, between
two fierces, or. peacham.
blaze r. n. / [from blaze.]. one that spreads reports.
utterers of secrets he from thence debari'd,
babblers of folly, and blazers of crine ;
his larum. bell might loud and wide be heard,
when cause requir’d, but never out of time ;
early and late it rung, at evening and at prime. spensor.
7% blazon. v. a. [blasonner, fr.)
1. to explain, in proper terms, the figures on ensigns armorial.
king edward gave to them the coat of arms, which i am
not herald enough to blazon into english. addison.
2. to deck : to embellish ; to adorn.
she blazons in dread smiles her hideous form ;
so lightning gilds the unrelenting storm. garth.
3. to display; to set to show.
o thou goddess,
thou divine nature how thyself thou blazon's
in these two princely boys they are as gentle
as zephyrs blowing below the violet,
not wagging his sweet head.
4. to celebrate ; to set out.
onc that excels the quirk of blazoning pens,
and in th’ essential vesture of creation,
shakespeare.
does bear all excellency. shakespeare.
5. to blaze about ; to make publick.
what's this but libelling against the senate,
and blazoning our injustice every where? shałospeare.
bla’zon. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the art of drawing or explaining coats of arms.
proceed unto beasts that are given in arms, and teach me
what i ought to observe in their blazon. pacham.
2. show ; divulgation; publication.
but this eternal blazon must not be
to ears of flesh and blood. shaoffeare.
3. celebration; proclamation of some quality.
i am a gentleman—i’ll be sworn thou art;
thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, action, and spirit;
do give thee five-fold blazon. shakespeare.
men con over their pedigrees, and obtrude the blazon of their
exploits upon the company. collier.
blazos ry.. n.s.. [from blazon.] the art of blazoning.
give certain rules as to the principles of blazonry.
peacham on drawing.
to ble ach. v. a. [bleechen, germ.] to whiten; commonly
to whiten by exposure to the open air.
when turtles tread, and rooks and daws;
and maidens bleach their summer smocks.
should i not seek
the clemency of some more temp'rate clime,
to purge my gloom ; and, by the sun refin'd,
bask in his beams, and bleach me in the wind dryden.
to ble ach. v. n. to grow white; to grow white in the
open air.
the white sheet bleaching in the open field. shakespeare.
for there are various penances enjoin'd ;
and some are hung to bleach upon the wind;
some plung'd in waters.
the deadly winter seizes; shuts up sense ; -
lays him along the snows, a stiffen'd coise,
stretch'd out, and bleaching in the northern blast. thomson.
bleak. adj. [blac, blacc, saxon.]
1. pale.
2. cold ; chill; cheerless.
intreat the north
to make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips,
and comfort me with cold.
the goddess that in rural shrine
dweli’s here with pan, or sylvan, by blest song
forbidding every bleak unkindly fog
to touch the prosperous growth of this tall wood. moston.
her desolation presents us with nothing but bleak and barren
shakespeare.
dryden.
shakspeare.
prospects. addison.
say, will ye bless the bleak atlantick soore,
or bid the furious gaul be rude no more ? pope.
blf a k. m. s. salburnus, from his white or bleak colour.] a
finall river fish.
the bleak, or freshwater sprat, is ever in motion, and there-
fore called by some the river swallow. his back is of a plea-
fant, sad sea water green; his belly white and shining like
the mountain snow. bleaks are excclient meat, and in best
season in august. j/al on.
ble akn ess. n.s.. [from 1/.4%.] coldness; chilness.
the inhabitants of nova zembla go naked, without com-
plaining of the bleains of the air; as the armies of the nor-
thern nations keep the field all winter. 4 dison.
ble'a ky. adj. [from bleak. j. bleak ; cold; chill.
on shrubs they browze, and, on the blay top,
of rugged hills, the thorny bramble crop. dryden-
blear. adj. [blaer, a blister, dutch..]
1. dim with rheum or water; fore with rheum.
it is a tradition that blear eyes affect sound eves. bacon.
it is no more in the power of calumny to blast the dignity
of an honest man, than of the blear eyed owl to cast scandal
on the sun. l'e/?range.
his bear eyes ran in gutters to his chin;
his beard was stubble, and his cheeks were thin.
when thou shalt see the blear ey’d fathers teach
their sons this harsh and mouldy sort of speech. dryden.
2. dim; obscure in general ; or that which makes dimness.
thus i hurl
my dazzling spells into the spungy air,
of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion,
dryder.
and give it false presentments. az.'tan.
to blear. v. a. [from the a jective.]
1. to make the eyes watry, or fore with rheum.
all tongues speak of him, and the bleared fights
are spectacled to see him. shakes eare.
the dardanian wives,
with bleared visages, come forth to view
th’ issue of th’ exploit. shakes care.
when i was young, i, like a lazy foo!,
would lear my eyes with oil, to stay from school;
averse to pains.
2. to dim the eyes.
this may stand for a pretty superficial argument, to #sear
our eyes, and lull us asleep in security. raleigh.
ble are dnfss. n. j. [from bleared.] the state of being blear-
cd, or dimmed with rheum.
the defluxion falling upon the edges of the eyelids, makes a
blearedness. // jenaa.
7% ble at. v. n. [blatan, sax.] to cry as a sheep.
we were as twinn's lambs, that did frisk i' th' sun,
and beat the one at th' other. shakespeare:
you may as well use question with the wolf,
why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb.
shakespeare', merchant of penice.
while on sweet grass her bleating charge does lie,
our happy lover feeds upon her eye. roscommon.
what bull dates bellow, or what sheep dares bloat
within the lion's den dryden.
bleat. n.s. [from the verb.] the cry of a sheep or lamb.
set in my ship, mine ear reach'd, where we rode,
the bellowing of oxen, and the bleat
of fleecy sheep.
ble b. m. s. solaen, to swell, germ.] a blister.
bled. preterite and particip. [from 7% bleed.]
7 * b.e.e.d. v. n. pret. i bled; i have bed, [bleban, saxon.]
1. to lose blood; to run with blood.
doyon.
chatman.
sooner.
i bleed inwardly for my lord. shakespeare.
bleed, bleed, poor country ! t
great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure;
for goodness dare not check thee! shakoff care.
many, upon the seeing of others bleed, or strangled, or tor-
tured, themselves are ready to faint, as if they bled. bacon.
2. to die a violent death.
the lamb thy riot dooms to bleed to-day;
had he thy reason, would he skip and play ? pope.
3. to lose blood medicinally; as, he bled for a fever.
4. to drop, as blood. it is applied to any thing that drops from
some body on incision, as blood from an animal.
for me the balm shall seed, and amber flow,
the coral redden, and the ruby glow. p: e.
7% ble ed. v. a. to let blood; to take blood from.
that from a patrict of distinguish’d note,
have bled, and purg'd me to a simple vote. petz.
ble it. w. adj. bashful. it is used in scotland, and the border-
blat f. { ing counties.
72 ble mish. v. a. [from blame, junias; from one, white,
fr. skinner.
1. to mark with any deformity.
likelier that my outward face might have been disguised,
than that the face of so excellent a mind could have been thus
bemished. sidney.
2. to defame; to tarnish, with respect to reputation.
not that my verse would 'emish all the fair;
but yet if some be bid, 'tis wisdom to beware. dryon.
those, who, by concerted defamations, cndeavour to 'semish
his character, incur the complicated guilt of il.nder and per-
jury. 4...dison.
blemis h. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a mark of deformity; a scar; a diminution of beauty.
as he bath caused a blownish in a man, so shall it be done to
him again. leviticus.
open it so from the eyelid, that you divide not that ; for,
in so doing, you will leave a remediless blemish. ///eman.
2. reproach ; disgrace; imputation.
i hat you have teen earnest, should be no llemish or discredit
at all unto you. iłocker.
ai.d
*
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 267</div><p class="text">}} i, e
b l i
!
and if we shall negled to propagate these blesod dispositions,
vhat others can undertake it, without some businish to us, some
reflection on our negligence : - spratt.
none more industriously publish the bemishes of an extraor-
dinary reputation, then such as le open to the same censures ;
raising applause to themselves, for resembling a person of an ex-
alted reputation, though in the blameable parts of his cha-
racter. addison.
2. a soil; turpitude ; taint; deformity.
first shall virtue he vice, and beauty be counted a blemish,
ere that i leave with song of praise her praise to solemnize.
sidney.
live thou, and to thy mother dead attest,
that clear she died from blemish criminal. fairy oueen.
is conformity with rome a blemish unto the church of eng-
land, and unto churches abroad an ornament hooker.
- not a hair perish'd :
on their sustaining garments not a blemish,
but fresher than before. shakes care.
evadne's husband ' 'tis a fault
to love, a blemish to my thought. jvaller.
that your duty may no bemish take,
i will myself your father's captive make. dryden.
such a mirth as this is capable of making a beauty, as well
as a blenish, the subject of derision. addison.
to ble nch. v. n. to shrink; to start back; to give way: not
used.
i’ll observe his looks;
i'll tent him to the quick; if he but bench,
i know my course. shakspeare.
patience herself, what goddess ere she be,
doth lesser blanch at sufferance than i do. słakoff care.
hold you ever to our special drift ;
though sometimes you do blench from this to that,
as cause doth minister. shakespeare.
to blen ch. v. a. to hinder ; to obstruct. not used.
the rebels besieged them, winning the even ground on the
top, by carrying up great trusses of hay before them, to blench
the defendants sight, and dead their shot. carew.
to blend. v. a. preter. i blended; anciently, blent. [blenban,
saxon j
1. to mingle together.
'tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white
nature's own sweet and cunning hand hath laid on.
- shakespeare.
the mission taught by the ancients is too flight or gross;
for bodies mixed according to their hypothesis, would not ap-
pear such to the acute eyes of a lynx, who would discern the
elements, if they were no otherwise mingled, than but blended
but not united. boyle.
he had his calmer influence, and his mien
did love and majesty together blend. dryden.
the grave, where even the great find rest,
and blended lie th' oppressor and th' oppress'd. pope.
2. to confound.
the moon should wander from her beaten way, the times
and seasons of the year blend themselves by disordered and con-
fused mixture. hooker.
3. to pollute ; to spoil; to corrupt. this signification was an-
ciently much in use, but is now wholly obsolete.
which when he saw, he burnt with jealous fire;
the eye of reason was with rage yllent. fairy queen.
regard of worldly muck doth foully blond,
and low abase the high heroick spirit. fairy queen.
the whilst thy kingdom from thy head is rent,
and thy throne royal with dishonour blent. spensor.
ble'nder. n.s.. [from to blend..] the person that mingles.
ble nt. the obsolete participle of blend. see blend.
to bless. v. a. preterite and participle, blosed or bloss.
[b]errian, saxon.]
1. to make happy; to prosper; to make successful.
the quality of mercy is not strain'd,
it droppeth as the gentle rain of heaven
upon the place beneath. it is twice bles'd;
it bloff'th him that gives, and him that takes. shakesp.
had i but died an hour before this chance,
i had liv'd a bloff d time : for, from this instant,
there's nothing serious in mortality. shakespeare.
this kingdom enjoyed the greatest calm, and the fullest
measure of felicity, that any people, in any age, for so long
time together, have been blossed with. clarendon.
happy this isle, with such a hero blos?;
what virtue dwells not in his loyal breast jvaller.
in vain with folding arms the youth assay’d
to stop her flight, and strain the flying shade ;
but she return’d no more, to bloss his longing eyes. dryden.
o hospitable jovel we thus invoke,
bless to both nations this auspicious hour. dryden.
2. to wish happiness to another ; to pronounce a blessing upon
him.
and this is the blessing where with moses the man of god
blosed the children of it...cl, before his death. deuteronomy.
3. to consecrate by a prayer.
he blood, and brake, and gave the loves. //the-w.
4. to prais : to glority or benefits received ; to celebrate.
unto us there is one only guide of all ag n's natural, and he
both the creator and worker of all in ali, alone to be bod,
adored, and honoured by all for ever. hooker.
i}ut blood be that great pow'r, that hath us boss'd
with longer life than earth and heav'n can have.’ davies.
5. it seems, in one place of sensor, to signify the same as to
wave ; to brano ; to sourish. this signification is taken
from an old rite of our ronish ancestors, who losing a field
directed their hands in quick succession to all parts of it.
- whom when the prince to battle new addres,
and threat'ning high his dreadful stroke did see,
his sparkling blade about his head he blo,
and smote off quite his right leg by the kace. fairy queen.
ble'ssed. particip. a.s. (from to boss.] ~:
1. happy; enjoying felicity.
blossed are the barren. luke.
2. holy and happy; happy in the favour of god.
all generations shall call me blosed. luke.
3. happy in the joys of heaven.
bosed are the dead which die in the lord. revelations.
ple'ssed 7 histle. [cnicus, lat.] the name of a plant.
ble'ss eply. adv. [from blosed.] happily.
this accident of clitophon's taking, had so los...} procured
their meeting. sidney.
ble'ss edn ess. m. s. [from blosed.]
i. happiness; felicity. -
many times have i, leaning to yonder palm, admired the
bosons of it, that it could bear love without the sense of
pain. - sidney.
his overthrow heap'd happiness upon him;
for then, and not till then, he felt himself,
and found the blossedness of being little,
2. sanetity.
earthlier happy is the rose distill'd,
than that, which, withering on the virgin thorn,
grows, lives, and dies in single bloftdnyi. shakspeare.
3. heavenly felicity.
it is such an one, as, being begun in grace, passes into glory,
blesdness, and immortality. south.
4. divine favour.
blf'ss er. m. s. [from lls...]. he that bless, or gives a bles.
sing; he that makes anything prosper. -
when thou receivest praise, take it indifferently, and return
it to god, the giver of the gift, or bloser of the action. taylor.
ble'ssing. m. s. [from bloss.]
1. benediction ; a prayer by which happiness is implored for any
one.
2. a declaration by which happiness is promised in a prophetick
and authoritative manner.
the person that is called, kneeleth down before the chair,
and the father layeth his hand upon his head, or her head, and
giveth the blessing. - bacon;
3. any of the means of happiness; a gift; an advantage; a
benefit. -
nor are his blosings to his banks confin'd,
but free, and common, as the sea and wind. denham.
political jealousy is very reasonable in persons persuaded of
the excellency of their constitution, who believe that they de-
rive from it the most valuable blosings of society. addison.
a just and wise magistrate is a blosing as extensive as the
community to which he belongs: a blosing which includes all
shakespeare.
other blosings whatsoever, that relate to this life. atterbury.
4. divine favour. -
my pretty cousin,
blessing upon you ! shakspeare.
i had most necd of blosing, and amen
stuck in my throat. shakespeare.
honour thy father and mother, both in word and deed, that
a blosing may come upon thee from them. ecclus.
he shall receive the blessing from the lord. psalms.
5. the hebrews, under this name, often understood the presents
which friends make to one another; in all probability, because
they are generally attended with blosings and compliments both
from those who give, and those who receive. salmet.
and jacob said, receive my present at my hand; take, i
pray thee, my blosing that is brought to thce. genosis.
bles.t. preterite and participle. [from bless.]
peace to thy gentle shade, and endless rest i
besi in thy genius, in thy love too bles? / pope.
blew. the preterite from blow.
the rest fled into a strong tower, where, seeing no remedy,
they desperately blew up themselves, with a great part of the
castle, with gunpowder. kncles.
bley me. m. s. an inflammation in the foot of a horse, between
the sole and the bone. farrier's dic7.
blight. m. s. [the etymology unknown.]
1. mildew ; according to skinner; but it seems taken by most
writers, in a general sense, for any cause of the failure of
fruits.
i com-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 268</div><p class="text">b l i
i complained to the oldest and best garden:rs, who often fell
into the same misfortune, and esteemed it some blight of the
spring. - temple.
2. anything nipping, or blasting. -
voten you come to the proof once, the first blight of frost
shall most infallibly strip you of all your glory. l'//trange.
to blight. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to corrupt with mildew.
this vapour bears up along with it any noxious mineral
steams; it then blas's vegetables, blights corn and fruit, and is
sometimes injurious even to men. //codward.
2. in general, to blast; to hinder from fertility. -
my courtry neighbours do not find it impossible to think of
a lane horse they have, or their blighted corn, till they have
run over in their minds all beings. locke.
but left harsh care the lover’s peace destroy,
and roughly blight the tender buds of joy,
let reason teach. lyttelton.
blind. adj. [blinb, saxon.]
1. without sight; wanting the sense of seeing ; dark.
the bind man that governs his steps by feeling, in defe&amp;t of
eyes, receives advertisement of things through a staff. digby.
those other two equall'd with me in face,
so were i equall'd with them in renown |
blind thamyris, and blind maeonides;
and teresias, and phineas, prophets old. milton.
2. intellectually dark ; unable to judge; ignorant: with to be-
fore that which is unseen.
all authors to their own defe&amp;ts are blind;
hadst thou, but janus like, a face behind,
to see the people, what splay mouths they make ;
to mark their fingers pointed at thy back. dryden.
3. sometimes of
blind of the future, and by rage misled,
he pulls his crimes upon his people's head. dryden.
4. unseen out of the publick view ; private : generally with
some tendency to some contempt or censure.
to grievous and scandalous inconveniencies they make
themselves subject, with whom any blind or secret corner is
judged a fit house of common prayer. hocker.
5. not easily discernible; hard to find; dark; obscure; unseen.
there be also blind fires under stone, which flame not out;
but oil be ng poured upon them, they flame out. bacon.
where else -
shall i inform my unacquainted feet
in the blind mazes of this tang!'d wood milton.
how have we wander'd a long dismal night,
led through blind paths by each deluding light. roscommon.
part ciceping under ground, their journey blind,
and climbing from below, their fellows meet. dryden.
so mariners mistake the promis'd gust,
and, with full sails, on the blind rocks are lost. dryden.
a postern door, yet unobserv’d and free,
join’d by the length of a blind gallery,
to the king's closet bed. dryden.
6. blind joff... [with chymists.] such as have no opening but
on one side. o
to blind v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to make blind; to deprive of fight.
you nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
into her scornsul eyes | shakespeare.
of whose hand have i received any bribe to blind mine eyes
there with ? and i will restore it. 1 samuel.
a blind guide is certainly a great mischief; but a guide that
blind; those whom he should itad, is undoubtedly a much
reater. south.
2. to darken; to obscure to the eye.
so whirl the seas, such darkness blind; the sky,
that the black night receives a deeper dye.
3. to darken the understanding.
this my long-suffering and my day of grace
they who neglect and scorn, shall never taste,
but hard be harden'd, blind be blinded more.
4. to obscure to the understanding.
the state of the controversy between us he endeavoured,
with all his art, to blind and confound. stillingfiret.
elin d. m. s.
1. something to hinder the sight.
hardly any thing in our conversation is pure and genuine;
civility casts a bind over the duty, under some customary
words. l'e/irange.
2. something to mislead the eye, or the understanding.
these discourses set an opposition between his commands
and decrees; making the one a blind for the execution of the
other. decay of piety.
to blin droi.p. v. a. [from blind and fold.] to hinder from
seeing, by blinding the eyes.
when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the
face. luke.
bll'n dfor d. adj. [from the verb ] having the eyes covered.
and oft himself he chanc'd to hurt unwares,
whilst reason, blent through passion, nought descried,
dryden.
milton.
but, as a blindfold bull, at random fares,
and where he hits, nought knows, and where he hurts,
nought cares. fairy.oueen.
who blindfold walks upon a river's brim,
when he should see, has he deserv'd to swim * dryden.
when lots are shuffled together, or a man blindfold casts a
dye, what reason can he have to presume, that he shall draw a
white stone rather than a black * south.
the women will look into the state of the nation with their
own eyes, and be no longer led blindfold by a male legislature.
zaayan.
bli'ndly. adv. [from blind.]
1. without fight.
2. implicitly ; without examination.
the old king, after a long debate,
by his imperious mistress blindly led,
has given cydaria to orbellan's bed. dryden.
how ready zeal for interest and party, is to charge atheism
on those, who will not, without examining, submit, and
blindly swallow their nonsense. lock.
3. without judgment or direction.
how seas and earth, and air, and active flame,
fell through the mighty void; and, in their fall,
were blindly gather'd in this goodly ball. dryden.
bli'ndman’s buff. n. s. a play in which some one is to have
his eyes covered, and hunt out the rest of the company.
disguis'd in all the mask of night,
we left our champion on his flight;
at blindman's buff to grope his way,
in equal fear of night and day. hudibras,
he imagines i shut my eyes again ; but surely he fancies i
play at blindman's buff with him; for he thinks i never have
my eyes open. stillings...et.
blin dness. n s. [from l'ind.]
1. want of sight.
i will smite every house of the people with blindros. zach.
2. ignorance; intellectual darkness.
all the rest as born of savage brood,
but with base thoughts are into blindnes, led,
and kept from looking on the lightsome day. spensor.
nor can we call it choice, when what we chuse,
folly and bindness only could refuse. denham.
whensoever we would proceed beyond these simple ideas,
we fall presently into darkness and difficulties, and can discover
nothing farther but our own blindness and ignorance. locke.
blind nettle, n. s. [scrofularia.] a plant.
bli'ndside. m. s. [from blind and side..] weakness; foible;
weak part.
he is too great a lover of himself; this is one of his blood-
sides; the best of men, i fear, are not without them. swift.
blind wor m. n. s. scarcilia, from blind and worm.] a small
viper, called likewise a slow worm; believed not to be ve-
in oii) olls.
you spotted snakes, with double tongue,
thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
newts and bindworms, do no wrong;
come not near our fairy queen. shakespeare.
the greater slow worm, called also the blindworm, is com-
monly thought to be blind, because of the littleness of his
eyes. grew.
to blink. v. n. [blincken, danish.]
1. to wink, or twinkle with the eyes.
so politick, as if one eye
upon the other were a spy;
that to trepan the one to think
the other blind, both strove to blink.
2. to see obscurely.
what's here ! the portrait of a blinking ideot.
sweet and lovely wall,
shew me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.
shakespeare's midsummer night's dream.
his figure such as might his soul proclaim;
one eye was blinking, and one leg was lame.
blin kar d m. s. [from blink.]
1. one that has bad eyes.
2. something twinkling.
in some parts we see many glorious and eminent stars, in
others few of any remarkable greatness, and, in some, none
but blinkards, and obscure ones. hakewill.
bliss. m. s. [b]irre, sax. from blfsarian, to rejoice.]
1. the highest degree of happiness; blessedness; felicity: gene-
rally us d of the happiness of blessed souls.
a mighty saviour hath witnessed of himself, i am the way;
hudibrar.
shakoff,
pope.
the way that leadeth us from misery into bliss. hooker.
dim sadness did not spare
that time celestial visages; yet, mix’d
with pity, violated not their bliss. a sistan.
- with nie
all my redeem'd may dwell, in joy and bliss. asilon.
2. felicity in general. -
condition, circumstance is not the thing;
riis is the same in subject or in king. pete.
7 bli'ss-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 269</div><p class="text">b, l, o.
b i, o
3.
t
o
$'.
&amp;
****
of
lf.
so
*
jo
311'ssful. a'i. [from loss and full.] full of joy ; happy in
the highest degree.
yet swimming in that sea of bossul joy,
he nought forgot. fairy queen.
the two saddest ingredients in hell, are deprivation of the
bissol vision, and confusion of face. hammond.
reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
uninterrupted joy, unival’d love,
in his ful solitude. milton.
so peaceful shalt thou end thy o days,
and steal thyself from life, by slow decays. pope.
first in the fields i try the filvan strains,
nor blush to sport in windsor's blissful plains. pope.
b1.1's fully. adv. [from blissful. j happily.
bli'ssful.ness. n.s.. [from blissful..] happiness; fulness of joy.
to b11’sso m. v. n. to caterwaul ; to be lustful. die?.
blister. m. s. [bluster, dutch...]
1. a pustule formed by raising the cuticle from the cutis, and
filled with serous blood.
in this state she gallops, night by night,
o'er ladies lips, who strait on kisses dream,
which oft the angry mab with blishers plagues,
because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are. shakes.
i found a great blisler drawn by the garlick, but had it cut,
which run a good deal of water, but filled again by next
night. temple.
2. any swelling made by the separation of a film or skin from
the other parts. -
upon the leaves there riseth a tumour like a blisler. bacon.
7% bliss's er. v. m. [from the noun..] to rise in blisters.
if i prove honeymouth, let my tongue blisher,
and never to my red look’d anger be
the trumpet any more.
embrace thy knees with loathing hands,
which blisler when they touch thee. dryden.
to bll's ter. v. a.
1. to raise blisters by some hurt, as by a burn, or rubbing.
look, here comes one, a gentlewoman of mine,
who falling in the flaws of her own youth,
hath blisler'd her report.
2. to raise blisters with a medical intention.
i blisler'd the legs and thighs; but was too late; he died
howling. joseman.
blithe. adj. [blice, saxon.] gay ; airy; merry; joyous;
sprightly; mithful.
we have always one eye fixed upon the countenance of our
enemies; and, according to the blithe or heavy aspect thereof,
our other eye sheweth some other suitable token either of dislike
or approbation. hooker.
then figh not so, but let them go,
and be you blithe and bonny. shakespeare.
for that fair female troop thou saw'st, that seem'd
of goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay;
shakespeare.
shakspeare.
yet empty of all good. milton.
to whom the wildy adder, blithe and glad:
empress the way is ready, and not long. milton.
and the milkmaid singeth blithe,
and the mower whets his scythe. milton.
should he return, that troop so blithe and bold,
precipitant in fear, would wing their flight. pope.
blı't h.l.y. adv. [from blithe..]. in a blithe manner.
bli'thn ess. } m. s. [from blithe..] the quality of being
bl 1't hso m n ess. blithe.
blithsome. adj. [from blithe..] gay; cheerful.
frosty blasts deface
the blithsome year: trees of their shrivell'd fruits
are widow’d. philips.
to bloat. v. a. [probably from blow.] to swell, or make
turgid with wind: it has up, an intensive particle.
his rude essays
encourage him, and bloat him up with praise,
that he may get more bulk before he dies. dryden.
the strutting petticoat smooths all distinetions, levels the
mother with the daughter. i cannot but be troubled to see
so many well-shaped innocent virgins bloated up, and waddling
addison.
up and down like bigbellied women.
t. bloat. v. n. to grow turgid.
if a person of a firm constitution begins to bloat, from be-
arbuthnot.
ing was m grows cold, his fibres grow weak.
bloat. adj. swelled with intemperance ; turgid.
the bloat king.
ill our.
lasitude, laziness, bloatedness, and scorbutical spots, are
arbuthnot.
blo bbf r. m. s. [from blob.] a word used in some counties for
symptoms of weak fibres.
a bubble.
there swimmeth also in the sea a round slimy substance,
called a lobber, reputed noisome to the fish. carew.
blo'beerli p. m. s. from blob, or blobber, and lip.] a thick lip.
they make a wit of their insipid friend,
his blobber'ips, and becile brows commend.
vol. i.
blo'beer lipped.
shakespeare's hamlet.
blo'atedness. n. s. [from bloat.] turgidness; swelling; tu-
dryden.
p loop lippe d. } aff. having swelled of hi. fo
a bobberlipped shell, seemeth to be a kind of musel. grew.
his person deformed to the highest degree; flat nosed, an
bobberlipped. l'ayorange.
block. n.s.. [block, dutch; bloc, fr.]
1. a heavy piece of timber, rather thick than long.
2. a mass of matter.
homer's apotheosis consists of a groupe of figures, cut in the
same block of marble, and rising one above another. a dison.
3. a massy body.
small causes are sufficient to make a man uneasy, when
great ones are not in the way: for want of a block, he will
stumble at a straw. swyt.
4. a rude piece of matter; in contempt.
when, by the help of wedges and beetles, an image is c'est
out of the trunk of some tree, yet, after the skill of artifi-
cers to set forth such a divine block, it cannot one moment se-
cure itself from being eaten by worms. stillings, et.
5. the piece of wood on which hats are formed. some old
writers use block for the hat itself.
he wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat; it ever
changes with the next block. shakespeare.
6. the wood on which criminals are beheaded.
some guard these traitors to the blook of death,
treason's true bed, and yielder up of breath. shakespeare.
at the instant of his death, having a long beard, after his
head was upon the block, he gently drew his beard aside, and
said, this hath not offended the king. bacon.
i'll drag him thence,
even from the holy altar to the block. ' dryden.
7. an obstruction; a stop.
can he ever dream, that the suffering for righteousness sake
is our felicity, when he sees us run so from it, that no crime
is block enough in our way to stop our flight? decay of piety.
8. a sea term for a pully. -
9. a blockhead; a fellow remarkable for stupidity.
the country is a desert, where the good
gain'd, inhabits not; born's not understood ;
there men become beasts, and prone to all evils;
in cities, blocks. - donne.
what tongueless blocks were they, would they not speak 2
- shakespeare's richard iii.
to block. v. a. [bloguer, fr.]
1. to shut up; to inclose, so as to hinder egress; to obstruct.
the states about them should neither by encrease of domi-
nion, nor by blocking of trade, have it in their power to hurt
or annoy.
they block the castle kept by bertram ;
but now they cry, down with the palace, fire it. drydon.
2. it has often up, to note clausure.
recommend it to the governor of abingdon, to send some
troops to block it up, from infesting the great road. clarendon.
the abbot raises an army, and blocks up the town on the
side that faces his dominions. addison.
block-house. n. s. [from block and house..] a fortress built to
obstruct or block up a pass, commonly to defend a harbour.
his entrance is guarded with block-houses, and that on the
town's side fortified with ordnance. carew.
rochester water reacheth far within the land, and is under
the protection of some block-houses. raleigh.
block-t in. m. s. [from block and tin.] so the tradesmen call
that which is pure or unmixed, and yet unwrought. boyle.
block a. d.e. m. s. [from block.] a siege carried on by shutting
up the place.
the enemy was necessitated wholly to abandon the llockade
of olivenza. tatler.
round the goddess roll
broad hats and hoods, and caps, a sable shoal;
thick, and more thick, the black blockade extends. pope.
to block ade. v. a. [from the noun..] to shut up by ob-
struction.
huge bales of british cloth blockade the door,
a hundred oxen at your levee roar. pope.
block head. m. s. [from block and head..] a stupid fellow; a
dolt; a man without parts.
your wit will not so soon out as another man’s will; it is
strongly wedged up in a blockhead. shakespeare.
weidly fit like stupid blockheads,
our hands committed to our pockets. hudo as.
a blockhead rubs his thoughtless skull,
and thanks his stars he was not born a fool. pope.
blo'ckheaded. adj. [from blockhead..] stupid; dull.
says a blockheaded boy, these are villainous creatures.
l'erange.
block is h. adj. [from hock.] stupid ; dull.
make a lott'ry,
and, by decree, let blockish ajax draw
the sort to fight with hector. sha's roe.
blo'ckishu.y. adv. [from blockish.) in a stupid manner.
block is hn ess. n.f. [from blockish j stupid, 'y; doness,
blo mary. m. s. the first forge in the iron mills, through
3 f w!..ca<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 270</div><p class="text">b l o
b l o
which the metal passes, after it has been first melted from the
mine. idics.
blo'n ket. n.s. [i suppose for blanket.]
our blonket livery's been all too sad
for thilke same season, when all is yolad
with pleasance. -
blood. m. s. [blob, saxon.]
1. the red liquor that circulates in the bodies of animals.
but flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof,
shall you not eat. genosis.
2. child ; progeny.
we’ll no more meet, no more see one another:
but yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter. shakesp.
3. family; kindred.
as many and as well born bloods as those,
spen t’”.
stand in his face, to contradict his claim. shakespeare.
o ! what an happiness is it to find
a friend of our own blood, a brother kind jwaller.
according to the common law of england, in administra-
tions, the whole blood is preferred to the half blood. ayliffe.
4. descent; lineage.
epithets of flattery, deserved by few of them; and not run-
ning in a blood, like the perpetual gentleness of the ormond
family. dryden.
5. blood royal ; royal lineage.
they will almost
give us a prince o' th' blood, a son of priam,
in change of him. shakespeare.
6. birth; high extraction.
i am a gentleman of blood and breeding. shakespeare.
7. murder; violent death.
it will have blood; they say, blood will have blood. shak.
the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the
ground. genosis, iv. io.
8. life.
when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own
house, upon his bed, shall i not therefore now require his blood
at your hand 2 2 samuel, iv. 11.
9. for blood. though his blood or life was at flake: a low phrase.
a crow lay battering upon a muscle, and could not, for his
blood, break the shell to come at the fish. l'estrange.
10. the carnal part of man.
flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my father
which is in heaven. 41a, the w, xvi. 17.
11. temper of mind; state of the passions.
will you, great fir, that glory blot,
in cold blood, which you gain'd in hot
12. hot spark; man of fire.
the news put divers young bloods into such a fury, as the
ambassadors were not, without peril, to be outraged. bacon.
13. the juice of any thing.
he washed his garments in wine, and his cloaths in the blood
of grapes. genosis, xlix. 11.
to blood. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to stain with blood.
then all approach the slain with vast surprise,
and, scarce secure, reach out their spears afar,
and blood their points, to prove their partnership in war.
dryden's fables.
he was blooded up to his elbows by a couple of moors,
hudibras.
whom he butchered with his own imperial hands. addison.
2. to enter; to enure to blood, as a hound.
fairer than fairest, let none ever say,
that ye were blooded in a yielded prey. spenser's sennets,
3. to blood, is sometimes to let blood medically.
4. to heat; to exasperate.
when the faculties intelle&amp;tual are in vigour, not drenched,
or, as it were blooded by the affections. bacon's apophthegms.
by this means, matters grew more exasperate; the auxiliary
forces of french and english were much blooded one against
another. bacon's henry vii.
blood-bolt er ed. adj. [from blood and bolter.] blood sprinkled.
the blood-bolter’d banquo smiles upon me. amacbeth.
blood-hor. adj. [from blood and hot.j hot in the same degree
with blood.
a good piece of bread first to be eaten, will gain time to
warm the beer blood-hot, which then he may drink safely. locłe.
to blood-let. v. n. [from blood and let j to bleed; to open
a vein medicinally.
the chyle is not perfeotly assimilated into blocd, by its cir-
culation through the lungs, as is known by experiments in
blood-letting. . arbuthnot on diments.
blood-letter. m. s. [from blood-let.] a phlebotomist; one
that takes away blood medically. -
this mischief in aneurisms, proceedeth from the ignorance
of the blood letter, who, not considering the errour committed
in letting blood, binds up the arm carelessly. j/seman.
blood-ston e. m. s. [harmatites ; from tlood and some.] the
name of a stone.
there is a stone, which they call the bloid-stone, which, worn,
is thought to be good for them that bleed at the nose; which,
no doubt, is by astriction, and cooling of the spirits. laton.
the bloodstone is green, spotted with a bright blood red.
/* codward ar. a 2 sili.
blood-thirsty. adj. [from blood and thiro. j. desirous to hed
blood.
and high advancing his blood thiroy blade,
struck one of those deformed heads. fairy oween.
the image of god the blood thirsty have not; for god is
charity and mercy itself. raleigh's hofors.
blood-vesse l. m. s. [from blood and vessel.] a vessel appro-
priated by nature to the conveyance of the blood.
the skins of the forehead were extremely tough and thick,
and had not in them any blood-vessel, that we were able to
discover. addison's speciator.
bloodflower. m. s. [haemanthus, lat.] a plant.
blood gui'lt in ess. m. s. [from blood and guity.j murder;
the crime of shedding blood.
and were there rightful cause of difference,
yet were’t not better, fair it to accord,
than with bloodguiltines; to heap offence,
and mortal vengeance join to crime abhorrod. fairy souren.
blood hou n'd. m. s. [from blood and hound. j a hound that
follows by the scent, and seizes with great fierceness.
hear this, hear this, thou tribune of the people:
thou zealous, publick bloodhound, hear and melt. drydon.
where are these rav’ning floodhounds, that pursue
in a full cry, gaping to swallow me? southern's inn, zah.
a bloodhound will follow the track of the person he pursues,
and all hounds the particular game they have in chace.
arbuthnot on aliments.
and though the villain 'scape a while, he feels
slow vengeance, like a boodhound, at his heels. swift.
blo'opily. adv. [from bloody..] with disposition to shed blood;
cruelly.
i told the pursuivant,
as too triumphing, how mine enemies,
to-day at pomfret, bloody were butcher'd. shakesp. r. iii;
this day, the poet, bloodily inclin'd,
has made me die, full fore against my mind. dryden.
bloodin ess. n.s...[from loody..] the state of being bloody.
it will manifest itself by its bloodinos; ; yet sometimes the
scull is so thin as not to admit of any. sharp's surgery.
bloodless. adj. [from blood.]
1. without blood ; dead.
he cheer'd my sorrows, and, for sums of gold,
the bloodles carcase of my hector sold. dryden's ani.
2. without slaughter.
war brings ruin where it should amend;
but beauty, with a bloodles, conquest, finds
a welcome sov’reignty in rudest minds. wallar.
bloodshed. n.s.. [from blood and shed.]
1. the crime of blood, or murder.
full many mischiefs follow cruel wrath;
abhorred bloodshed, and tumultuous strife,
unmanly murder, and unthrifty scath.
all murders past do stand excus’d in this;
and this so sole, and so unmatchable,
shall prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest,
exampl’d by this heinous spectacle. shakesp. k. john.
a man, under the transports of a vehement rage, passes a
different judgment upon murder and bloodshed, from what he
does when his revenge is over. zuth.
2. slaughter; waste of life.
so by him caesar got the victory,
through great bloodhed, and many a sad assay. fairy qorn.
of wars and bloodshed, and of dire events,
i could with greater certainty foretel. dryden's tyran. love.
bloops h edder. n.s.. [from bloodshed.] murderer.
he that taketh away his neighbour's living, slayeth him;
and he that defraudeth the labourer of his hire, is a blood-
fairy queen.
shedder. ecosts, xxxiv. 22.
bloods hor. adj. [from blood and shot...] filled with
bloods hott e.n. blood bursting from its proper vesicls.
and that the winds their bellowing throats would try,
when redd'ning clouds reflect his blodot eye. gaith.
bloodsuck er. m. s. [from blood and sack.]
1. a leech; a fly; any thing that sucks blood.
2. a cruel man; a murderer.
god keep the prince from all the pack cf you;
a knot you are of damned bloodsuckers / shakesp. rich. i's.
the nobility cried out upon him, that he was a bouctor,
a murderer, and a particide. howard.
bloodwit. m. s. a fine anciently paid as a compensation for
blood.
bloodwort. n.s. a plant.
bloody. adj. [from blood.]
1. stained with blood.
2. cruel ; murderous: applied either to men or fos.
by continual martial exercises, without blood, she made
them perfect in that bloody art. sidney.
false of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand. shakesh. k. lear.
i grant him bloody,
luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful.
so...?:, he:h.
i dou
3
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 271</div><p class="text">b l o
b l o
:
i
:
*
o
o
o
o
o
o:
:
thou bloodier villain,
than terms can give thee out. shakes. macbeth.
alas! why gnaw you so your nether lip;
some bloody passion shakes your very frame;
these are portents: but yet i hope, i hope,
they do not point on me. shakespeare's othella.
the bloody fact
will be aveng'd; and th’ other's faith approv’d,
lose no reward; though here thou see him die,
rolling in dust and gore. milton's paradise lost.
the bloodiyl vengeance which she could pursue,
would be a trifle to my loss of you. dryden's indian emp.
proud nimrod first the bloody chace began,
a mighty hunter, and his prey was man. pope's w. forest.
bloody flux. n.s. the dysentery; a disease in which the ex-
crements are mixed with blood.
cold, by retarding the motion of the blood, and suppressing
perspiration, produces giddiness, sleepiness, pains in the bow-
els, looteness, bloody fluxes. arbuthnot on air.
bloody-min dfd. adj. [from bloody and mind.] cruel; in-
clined to bloodshed.
i think you'll make me mad: truth has been at my tongue's
end this half hour, and i have not the power to bring it out,
for fear of this bloody-minded colonel. dryden's spanish fryar.
bloom. n. j. [hium, germ. bloem, dutch..]
1. a blosion, ; the flower which precedes the fruit.
how nature paints her colours, how the bee
sits on her bloom, extracting liquid sweet. paradise loft.
a medlar tree was planted by ;
the spreading branches made a goodly show,
alid full of opening blooms was ev'ry bough. dryden.
haite to yonder woodbine bow'rs ;
the turf with rural dainties shall be crown'd,
while opening blooms diffuse their sweets around. pope.
2. the state of immaturity; the state of any thing improving,
and ripening to higher perfection.
were i no queen, did you my beauty weigh,
my youth in bloom, your age in its decay. dryden's aurengz.
3. the ulue colour upon plums and grapes newly gathered.
4. [in the iron works.] a piece of iron wrought into a mass,
two feet square.
to bloom. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to bring or yield blossoms.
the rod of aaron for the house of levi was budded, and
brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded al-
monds. numbers, xvii. 8.
it is a common experience, that if you do not pull off some
blossoms the first time a tree bloometh, it will blossom itself to
death. bacon's natural history.
2. to produce, as blossoms.
rites and custons, now superstitious, when the strength of
virtuous, devout, or charitable affection bloomed them, no man
could justly have condemned as evil. hooker.
3. to be in a state of youth and improvement.
beauty, frail flow'r, that ev'ry season fears,
blooms in thy colours for a thousand years. pope's epistles.
o greatly bless'd with every blooming grace
with equal steps the paths of glory trace. pope's odyssey.
bloomy. adj. [from bloom.] full of blooms ; flowery.
o nightingale ! that on yon bloomy spray
warblest at eve, when all the woods are still. milton.
departing spring could only stay to shed
her bloomy beauties on the genial bed,
but leit the manly summer in her stead. dryden.
hear how the birds, on ev'ry bloomy spray,
with joyous musick wake the dawning day. pope.
blor e. n. s [from blow.] . act of blowing; blast: an ex-
pressive word, but not used.
out rusht, with an unmeasur’d roar,
those two winds, tumbling clouds in heaps; ushers to
either's biore. chapman's iliad.
blo'ssom. n. s. [blorme, sax.] the flower that grows on
any plant, previous to the seed or fruit. . we generally call
those flowers blossoms, which are not much regarded in them-
selves, but as a token of some following production.
cold news for me:
thus are my blasms blasted in the bud,
and caterpillars eat my leaves away.
merrily, merrily shall i live now,
under the clossom that hangs on the bough. shakesp. tempes?.
the pulling off many of the blossoms of a fruit tree, doth
make the fruit fairer. bacon's natural history.
to his green ears your censure you would suit,
not blast the blossom, but expest the fruit. dryden.
to blossom. v. m. [from the noun..] to put forth blossoms.
this is the state of man: to-day he puts forth
the tender leaves of hope; to-morrow, blooms,
and bears his blushing honours thick upon him. sh. h. viii.
although the figuree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be
in the vines, yet will i rejoice in the lori. hibb. iii. 17.
the want of rain at bloss.ning time, often occasions the
dropping off of the blossoms, for want of sap. 44%rtimer.
shakesh. hen. iv.
to blot. v. a. [from blottir, fr. to hide.]
1.to obliterate; to make writing invisible, by covering it withink.
you that are king
have caus’d him, by new act of parliament,
to blot out me, and put his own son in. shakso. henry vi.
ev’n copious dryden wanted, or forgot,
the last and greatest art, the art to blot. pope.
a man of the most understanding will find it impossible to
make the best use of it, while he writes in constraint, perpetu-
ally softening, correołing, or blotting out expresions. swift.
2. to efface ; to erase.
o bertran, oh!, no more my foe, but brother:
one act like this blots out a thousand crines. dryden.
these simple ideas, offered to the mind, the understanding
can no more refuse, nor alter, nor boot out, than a mirrour can
refuse, alter, or obliterate, the images which the objects pro-
duce. locke.
3. to make black spots on a paper; to blur.
heads overfull of matter, be like pens overfull of ink,
which will sooner blot, than make any fair letter. ascham.
o sweet portial
here are a few of the unpleasant'st words
that ever blotted paper. shakesp. merch. of wenice.
4. to disgrace; to disfigure.
unknit that threat'ning unkind brow;
it blots thy beauty, as frost bites the meads,
§. thy fame. shakesp. "aming of the shrew.
my guilt thy growing virtues did defame;
my blackness blotted thy unblemish’d name. dryden’s afn.
for mercy's sake, restrain thy hand,
blot not thy innocence with guiltless blood. rowe,
5. to darken.
he sung how earth blots the moon's gilded wane,
whilst foolish men beat sounding brass in vain.
blot. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. an obliteration of something written.
let flames on your unlucky papers prey,
your wars, your loves, your praises, be forgot,
and make of all an universal blot. dryden's juvenal.
2. a blur; a spot upon paper.
3. a spot in reputation; a stain; a disgrace; a reproach.
make known,
it is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,
that hath depriv'd me. shakesp. king lear.
a lie is a foul blot in a man; yet it is continually in the
mouth of the untaught. ecclus, xx. 24.
a disappointed hope, a blot of honour, a strain of consci-
ence, an unfortunate love, will serve the turn. temple.
4. [at backgammon.] when a single man lies open to be taken
up; whence to hit a blot.
he is too great a master of his art, to make a blot which
may so easily be hit. dryden's dedication, æneid.
blotch. n.s. [from blot..] a spot or pustule upon the skin.
spots and blotches, of several colours and figures, straggling
over the body; some are red, others yellow, or black. harvey.
to blot e. v. a. to smoke, or dry by the smoke; as bloted
herrings, or red herrings. -
blow. m. s. [blowe, dutch.]
1. the act of striking.
2. a stroke.
a most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows,
who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
am pregnant to good pity. shakespeare's king lear.
a woman's tongue,
that gives not half so great a blow to th’ ear,
as will a chesnut. shakespeare's taming of the shrew.
words of great contempt, commonly finding a return of
equal scorn, blows were fastened upon the most pragmatical of
the crew. clarendon.
3. the fatal stroke; the stroke of death.
assuage your thirst of blood, and strike the blow. dryd.
4. an act of hostility; blows are used for combat or war.
be most abated captives to some nation
that won you without blows.
unarm'd if i should go,
what hope of mercy from this dreadful foe,
cowley.
shakespeare.
but woman-like to fall, and fall without a blow. pope.
5. a sudden calamity; an unexpe&amp;ted evil.
people is broken with a grievous blow. jerem.
to all but thee in fits he seem'd to go,
and 'twas my ministry to deal the blow. parnel.
6. a single action; a sudden event.
every year they gain a victory, and a town; but if they are
once defeated, they lose a province at a blow. dryden.
7. the act of a fly, by which she lodges eggs in flesh.
i much fear, left with the blows of flies,
his brass inflicted wounds are fill’d. chapman's iliad.
to blow. v. m. pret. blew ; particip. pass blown. [biapas, sax.]
i. to make a current of air.
at his fight the mountains are shaken, and at his will the
south wind bloweth. ecclus, xliii. 16.
fruits, for long keeping, gather before they are full ripe, and
*pl
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 272</div><p class="text">b l o
b i, u
in a dry day, towards noon, and when the wind b/, with not
south ; and when the moon is in decrease. lacon's nat. ho.
by the fragrant winds that bow - - -
o'er th' elysian flow’rs. pope's st. caecilia.
2. this word is used sometimes impersonally with it.
it blew a terrible tempest at sea once, and there was one
seaman praying. l’estrange.
if it blows a happy gale, we must set up all our sails, though
it sometimes happens, that our natural heat is more powerful
than our care and correctness. dryden.
3. to pant; to puff; to be breathless.
here's mrs. page at the door, sweating and blowing, and
looking wildly. shakespeare.
each aking nerve refuse the lance to throw,
and each spent courser at the chariot blow. pope.
4. to breathe.
says the satyr, if you have gotten a trick of blowing hot and
cold out of the same mouth, i've e'en done with ye.
l'effrange.
5. to sound with being blown.
nor with less dread the loud
ethereal trumpet from on high 'gan blow. paradis? los!.
there let the prating organ blow, -
to the full-voic’d quire below. milton.
6. to sound, or play musically by wind.
the priests shall blow with the trumpet. josh.
when ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east
parts shall go forward. numbers.
7. to blow over. to pass away without effect.
storms, though they blow over divers times, yet may fall at
last. - baron's essays.
when the storm is blown over,
how best is the swain,
who begins to discover
an end of his pain. granville,
but those clouds being now happily blown over, and our sun
clearly shining out again, i have recovered the relapse. denh.
8. to blow up. to fly into the air by the force of gunpowder.
on the next day, some of the enemy's magazines blew up ;
and it is thought they were destroyed on purpose by some of
their men. tatler,
to blow. v. a.
1. to drive by the force of the wind; with a particle to fix
the meaning.
though you unty the winds,
though bladed corn be lodg’d, and trees blown down,
though castles topple on their warders heads. a sacbeth.
fair daughter, blow away those mists and clouds,
and let thy eyes shine forth in their full lustre. denham.
these primitive heirs of the christian church, could not so
easily blow off the doctrine of passive obedience. south.
2. to inflame with wind.
i have created the smith that bloweth the coals. isaiah.
a fire not blown shall consume him. job.
3. to swell; to puff into size.
no blown ambition doth our arms incite,
but, love, dear love, and our ag’d father's right.
4. to form into shape by the breath.
spherical bubbles, that boys sometimes blow with water, to
which soap hath given a tenacity. boyle.
5. to sound an instrument of wind musick.
blow the trumpet among the nations.
where the bright seraphim, in burning row,
their loud uplifted angel trumpets blow.
6. to warm with the breath.
when ificles hang by the wall,
and dick the shepherd blows his nail,
and tom bears logs into the hall,
and milk comes frozen home in pail.
7. to spread by report.
but never was there man of his degree,
so much esteem’d, so well belov'd as he .
so gentle of condition was he known,
that through the court his courtesy was blown.
8. to blow out. to extinguish by wind or the breath.
your breath first kindled the dead coal of war,
and brought in matter, that should feed this fire:
and now 'tis far too huge to be blown out,
with that same weak wind which enkindled it. shakes.
moon, slip behind some cloud, some tempest rise,
and blow out all the stars that light the skies. dryden.
9. to low up. to raise or swell with breath.
a plague of sighing and grief it blows a man up like a
bladder. shakespeare.
before we had exhausted the receiver, the bladder appeared
as full as if hown up with a quill. doyle.
it was my breath that blew this tempest up,
upon your flubborn usage of the pope. shoes: care.
an empty bladder gravitates no more than when town up,
but somewhat less; yet descends more easily, because with less
res.starce grew.
i c. 12 low up. to inflate with pride.
k. lear.
jerem.
milton.
shakespeare.
dryden.
blown up with the conceit of his merit, he did not think te
had received good measure from the king. baeza.
11. to blow up. to kindle.
his presence soon blows up the unkindly fight,
and his loud guns speak thick like angry men. drydez.
12. to move by affatus.
when the mind finds herself very much inflamed with de-
votion, she is too much inclined to think that it is blotz n up
with something divine within herself. 4./ai/24-
13. to blow up. to burst with gunpowder; to raise into
the air.
the captains hoping, by a mine, to gain the city, ap-
proached with soldiers ready to enter upon bowing up of the
mine. knolles's hisł. of the torks.
their chief blown up in air, not waves expir’d,
to which his pride presum'd to give the law. dryder.
not far from the said well, blowing up a rock, he formerly
observed some of these. //codward.
14. to infect with the eggs of flies. i know not how this
sense belongs to the word.
i would no more endure
this wooden slavery, than i would suffer
the flesh-fly blow my mouth. shakespeare.
rather at nilus' mud
lay me stark naked, and let the water-flies
blow me into abhorring. shakespeare.
15. to blow upon. to make stale.
i am wonderfully pleased, when i meet with any passage in
an old greek or latin author, that is not blown upon, and
which i have never met with in any quotation. aadi/~.
he will whisper an intrigue that is not yet blown upon by
common fame. addison.
to blow. v. n. [blopan, saxon.] to bloom ; to blossom.
we lose the prime to mark how spring
our tended plants, how blows the citron grove,
what drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed. milton.
this royal fair
shall, when the blossom of her beauty's blown,
see her great brother on the british throne. jwaller.
fair is the kingcup that in meadow blows,
fair is the daisy that beside her grows. gay.
for thee idume's spicy forests blow,
and seeds of gold in ophir's mountains glow. pope.
blow er. m. s. [from blow.] a melter of tin.
add his care and cost in buying wood, and in fetching the
same to the blowing-house, together with the blowers, two or
three months extreme and encreasing labour. carew.
blow n. the participle passive of blow.
all the sparks of virtue, which nature had kindled in them,
were so blown to give forth their uttermost heat, that justly it
may be affirmed, they inflamed the affections of all that knew
them. sidney-
the trumpets sleep, while cheerful horns are blown,
and arms employ'd on birds and beasts alone. pope.
blow poin t. n.s. a child's play, perhaps like pushpin.
shortly boys shall not play
at spancounter or blowpoint, but shall pay
toll to some courtier. denne.
blowth. m. s. [from blow.] bloom, or blossom.
ambition and covetousness being but green, and newly
grown up, the seeds and cffects were as yet but potential, and
in the blowth and bud. raleigh.
blowze. m. s. a ruddy fat-faced wench.
blowzy. adj. [from blowze.] sun burnt; high coloured.
blu bber. m. s. [see blob.] the part of a whale that con-
tains the oil.
to blu’bb er. v. n. [from the noun..] to weep in such a man-
ner as to swell the cheeks.
even so lies she,
blull'ring and weeping, weeping and blubb’rīrg.
shakesp. romeo and juliet.
a thief came to a boy that was blubbering by the side of a
well, and asked what he cried for. l’e/irange.
soon as glumda!clitch miss'd her pleasing care,
she wept, she blubber'd, and she tore her hair.
t. bru'eph r. v. a. to swell the cheeks with weeping,
fair streams represent unto me my blubber'd face; let tears
procure your stay. sidney.
the wild wood gods arriv'd in the place,
there find the virgin doleful, desolate,
with ruffled raiment, and fair blubber 'd face,
as her outrageous foe had left her late. fairy queen.
tir’d with the search, not finding what she seeks,
with cruel blows she pounds her bubor’d checks. dryden.
bluon fred. particip: a so. [from to biolor.] swelled ; bog;
applied commonly to the lip.
thou fing with him, thou booby never ripe
was so profen'd, to touch that blubber'd lip dryden.
blu'd6 eon. m. s. a short slick, with one cnd loaded, used as
an offensive weapon.
blue. cd}. [blacy, sax. lieu, fr.] o::c of the seven or ginal
colours. -
7 to cre's
swift. .
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 273</div><p class="text">b l u
b l u
o:
*
-o-' .
lido a
air
red,
lat (i
12 c.
-
s
there's gold, and here,
my blues' veins to kiss ; a hand that kings
have lipt and trembled kissing. shakespeare:
where fires thou find'st unrak'd, and hearths unswept,
there pinch the maids as blue as bilberry. shakespeare.
o coward conscience how dost thou afflict me !
the lights burn blue.—is it not dead midnight
cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
why does one climate, and one soil endue
the blushing poppy with a crimson hue ;
yet leave the lily pale, and tinge the violet blue * prior.
there was scarce any other colour sensible, besides red and
blue; only the blues, and principally the second blue, inclined
a little to green. newton.
blue bottle. n.s. scyanus ; from blue and bottle.]
1. a flower of the bell shape; a species of bottleflower.
if you put bluebottles, or other blue flowers, into an ant-hill,
they will be stained with red : because the ants thrust their
stings, and instil into them their stinging liquour. ray.
2. a fly with a large blue belly.
say, fire of inse&amp;ts, mighty sol,
a fly upon the chariot-pole
cries out, what blue-bottle alive
did ever with such fury drive 2 prior.
blue-eyed. adj. [from blue and eye.] having blue eyes.
rise then, fair blue-ey'd maid, rise and discover
shakesp.
thy silver brow, and meet thy golden lover. crashaw.
nor to the temple was she gone, to move,
with prayers, the blue-ey'd progeny of jove. dryden.
blueha'ired. adj. [from blue and hair.] having blue hair.
this place,
the greatest and the best of all the main,
he quarters to his blue-haird deities.
blu'ely. adv. [from blue.] with a blue colour.
this 'squire he drop'd his pen full soon,
while as the light burnt blue!y. swift.
blu’en ess. n. s. [from blue.] the quality of being blue.
in a moment our liquor may be deprived of its bluenes,
and restored to it again, by the affusion of a few drops of
liquours. boyle on colours.
bluff. adj. big ; surly ; blustering.
like those whom stature did to crowns prefer,
black-brow’d and bluff, like homer's jupiter.
blu'ish. adj. [from blue.] blue in a smail degree.
side sleeves and skirts, round underborne, with a bluish
tinsel. shakespeare.
at last, as far as i could cast my eyes
upon the sea, somewhat, methought, did rise
like bluish mists.
here, in full light, the russet plains extend,
there, wrapt in clouds, the bluish hills ascend. pope.
blu’ish ness. n.s.. [from blue.] a small degree of blue colour.
i could make, with crude copper, a solution without the
bluishness, that is wont to accompany its vulgar solutions. boyle.
to blu'nder. v. m. [blunderen, dutch; perhaps from blind.]
1. to mistake grossly; to err very widely; to mistake stupidly.
it is a word implying contempt.
it is one thing to forget matter of fact, and another to
blunder upon the reason of it. l’estrange.
the grandees and giants in knowledge, who laughed at all
besides themselves, as barbarous and insignificant, yet blun-
dered, and stumbled, about their principal concern. south.
2. to flounder; to stumble.
he who now to sense, now nonsense leaning,
means not, but bounders round about a meaning. pope.
to blu'nder. v. a. to mix foolishly or blindly.
he seems to understand no difference between titles of re-
spe&amp;t and acts of worship; between expressions of esteem and
devotion; between religious and civil worship; for he blunders
and confounds all these together; and whatever proves one,
he thinks, proves all the rest. stillingfleet.
blu'nder. m. s. [from the verb.] a gross or shameful mistake.
it was the advice of schomberg to an historian, that he
fhould avoid being particular in the drawing up of an army,
and other circumstances in the day of battle ; for that he had
observed notorious blunders and absurdities committed by wri-
ters not conversant in the art of war. addison.
it is our own ignorance that makes us charge those works
of the almighty, as defects or blunders, as ill-contrived or
ill-made. derham.
blu'nder buss. n. s. [from blunder.] a gun that is charged
with many bullets, so that, without any exact aim, there is
a chance of hitting the mark.
there are blunderbuses in every loop-hole, that go off of
their own accord, at the squeaking of a fiddle. dryden.
blu'nder fr. m. s. [from blunder.] a man apt to commit blun-
ders; a blockhead.
another fort of judges will decide in favour of an authour,
or will pronounce him a mere blunderer, according to the com-
pany they have kept. //afts.
t. under head. m. s. (from blunder and head..] a stupid
fellow.
vol. i.
milton.
dryden.
dryden.
at the rate of this thick-skulled blunderhead, every plow-
jobber shall take upon him to read upon divinity. l’e/trange.
blunt. adj. [etymology uncertain.]
1. dull on the edge or point; not sharp.
thanks to that beauty, which can give an edge to the blunt-
es! swords. sidney.
if the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must
he put to more strength. eccles.
2. dull in understanding; not quick.
valentine being gone, i’ll quickly cross,
by some sly trick, blin: thurio's dull proceeding. shakes.
3. rough ; not delicate; not civil.
whitehead, a grave divine, was of a blunt stoical nature ;
one day the queen happened to say, i like thee the better, be-
cause thou livest unmarried. he answered; madam, i like
you the worse. bacon.
the mayor of the town came to seize them in a blunt man-
ner, alledging a warrant to stop them. /footton.
'tis not enough your counsel still be true;
blunt truths more mischief than nice falsehoods do. pope.
4. abrupt ; not elegant.
to use too many circumstances, ere one come to the matter,
is wearisome ; to use none at all, is blunt. bacon.
5. hard to penetrate. this use is improper.
i find my heart hardened and blunt to new impressions; it
will scarce receive or retain affections of yesterday. pope.
to blunt. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to dull the edge or point.
so sicken waining moons too near the sun,
and blunt their crescents on the edge of day. dryden.
earthy limbs, and gross allay,
blunt not the beams of heav'n, and edge of day. dryden.
he had such things to urge against our marriage,
as, now declar'd, would blunt my sword in battle,
and dastardize my courage. dryden.
2. to repress, or weaken any appetite, desire, or power of the
mind.
blunt not his love;
nor lose the good advantage of his grace,
by seeming cold.
blu'ntly, adv. [from blunt.]
1. in a blunt manner; without sharpness.
2. coarsely; plainly ; roughly.
i can keep honest counsels, marr a curious tale in telling it,
and deliver a plain message blunty. shakespeare.
a man of honest blood,
who to his wife, before the time assign'd
for childbirth came, thus bluntly spoke his mind.
blu'nt ness. n. s. [from blunt.]
1. want of edge or point; dulness; obtuseness; want of sharp-
ness.
the crafty boy, that had full oft essay’d
to pierce my stubborn and resisting breast,
but still the bluntness of his darts betray’d.
2. coarseness; roughness of manners; rude sincerity.
his filence grew wit, his bluntness integrity, his beasily ig-
norance, virtuous simplicity. sidney.
manage disputes with civility; whence some readers will be
assisted to discern a difference betwixt bluntness of speech and
strength of reason. boyle.
false friends, his deadliest foes, could find no way,
but shows of honest bluntness to betray. dryden.
blu'n'twitt e.d. adj. [from blunt and wit..] dull ; stupid.
bluntwitted lord, ignoble in demeanour. shakespeare.
blur. n.s.. [borra, span. a blot, skinner.] a blot; a stain;
a spot.
man, once fallen, was nothing but a great blur ; a total
universal pollution. south.
to blur. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to blot; to obscure ; without quite effacing.
such an act,
that blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
calls virtue hypocrite.
long is it since i saw him ;
but time hath nothing blurr'd those lines of favour,
which then he wore. shakespeare.
concerning innate principles, i desire these men to say,
whether they can, or cannot, by education and custom, be
blurred and blotted out * locke.
2. to blot; to stain ; to fully.
sarcasms may eclipse thine own,
. but cannot blur my lost renown. hudibras.
to blu rt. v. a. [without etymology.] to speak inadvert-
ently ; to let fly without thinking : commonly with out in-
tensive.
others cast out bloody and deadly specches at random, and
cannot hold, but blurt out those words, which afterwards they
are forced to eat. hak, will.
they had some belief of a deity, which they, upon fur-
prizal, thus blurt out. covernment of the tongue.
they blush if they blurt out, ere well aware,
a swan is white, or queensbury is fair. 2 oung.
3 g **
shakespeare.
drydon-
sackling.
shakespeare.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 274</div><p class="text">b m i
b o a
73 blush. v. n. [boson, dutch..]
1. to betray shame of confusion, b
or forehead.
y a red colour on the check
i have mark’d
a thousand blosing apparitions . .
to start into her face; a thousand innocent shames,
in angel whiteness, bear away these blushes. shakesp.
i will go wash :
and when my face is fair, you shall perceive
whether 1 blush or no. shakespeare.
all these things are graceful in a friend's mouth, which are
blushing in a man's own. bacon.
shame causeth bishing; blushing is the resort of the blood
to the face; although blushing will be seen in the whole breast,
yet that is but in passage to the face. bacon.
blush then, but blush for your destructive filence,
that tears your soul.
2. to carry ared colour, or any soft and bright colour.
- to-day he puts forth
the tender leaves of hope; to-morrow blossoms,
and bears his blushing honours thick upon him.
- but here the roses blush so rare,
here the mornings smile so fair,
as if neither cloud, nor wind,
but would be courteous, would be kind. crashaw.
along those blushing borders, bright with dew. thomson.
3. it has at before the cause of shame.
he whin'd, and roar'd away your victory,
that pages blush'd at him; and men of heart
look’d wond'ring at each other. shakespeare.
you have not yet lost all your natural modesty, but blush at
vour vices. calamy's sermons.
to blush. v. a.
smith.
shakesp.
to make red. not used.
pale and bloodless,
being all descended to the lab’ring heart,
which with the heart there cools, and ne'er returneth
to blush and beautify the cheek again. shakespeare.
blus h. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. the colour in the cheeks, raised by shame or confusion.
the virgin's wish, without her fears, impart,
excuse the blush, and pour out all the heart.
2. a red or purple colour.
3. sudden appearance; a signification that seems barbarous, yet
used by good writers.
all purely identical propositions, obviously and at first blush,
appear to contain no certain instruction in them. locke.
blu's hy. adj. [from blush.] having the colour of a blush.
pope.
blossoms of trees, that are white, are commonly inodorate; ,
those of apples, crabs, peaches, are blushy, and smell sweet. bac.
stratonica entering, moved a blushy colour in his face; but
deserting him, he relapsed into paleness and languour.
harvey on consumptions.
t, blu'ster. v. n. [supposed from blast.]
1. to roar as a storm ; to be violent and loud.
earth his uncouth mother was,
and bluff'ring æolus his boasted fire. - spensor.
so now he storms with many a sturdy stoure;
so now his blo/"ring blast each coast doth scour. spenser.
2. to bully; to puff; to swagger; to be tumultuous.
my heart's too big to bear this, says a blustering fellow; i'll
destroy myself. sir, says the gentleman, here's a dagger at
your service : so the humour went off. l’estrange.
either he must fink to a downright confession, or must huff
and bluffer, till perhaps he raise a counter-storm. gov. tong.
virgil had the majesty of a lawful prince, and statius only
the blu/lering of a tyrant. drydon.
there let him reign the jailor of the wind;
with hoarse commands his breathing subjecis call,
and boast and blufter in his empty hall.
blu'st er. n.s. [from the verb.]
1. roar of storms. tempest.
the skies look grimly,
and threaten present busiers.
to the winds they set
their corners; when with bluffer to confound
sea, air, and shore.
2. noise; tumult. o
so, by the brazen trumpet’s bluffer,
troops of all tongues and nations muster.
3. turbulence; fury.
spare thy athenian cradle, and those kin,
which in the blu/ler of thy wrath must fall
with those that have offended.
4. boast; boisterousness.
a coward makes a great deal more bluffer than a man of
honour. l'e/irange.
blu'st er er. m. s. [from bloser.] a swaggerer; a bully; a tu-
multuous noisy fellow.
elu's rrous. adj. [from bluffer.] tumultuous; noisy.
the ancient heroes were illustrious
for being benign, and not boyfrcus.
b.m.i. m. s. a note in musick.
dryden.
shakoshcare.
milton.
swift.
shakespeare.
audi'raj.
gamut i am, the ground of all accord,
bmi, bianca, take him for thy lord.
bo, interj.
enemy. -
bo'. n. s. [ban, saxon; beer, dutch..] the male swine.
to fly the loar, before the boar pursues,
were to incense the boar to follow us. shaky?eare-
she sped the boar away;
his eyeballs glare with fire, suffus'd with blood;
his neck shuts up a thickest thorny wood;
his bristled back a trench impal'd appears. jdryder.
bo'ar-spea r. n. s. [from boar and spear.] a spear used in
hunting the boar.
and in her hand a sharp boar-spear she held,
and at her back a bow and quiver gay,
stuff'd with steel-headed darts.
echion threw the first, but miss'd his mark,
and struck his boar-spear on a maple bark.
board. n.s.. [baurd, goth. braed, saxon.]
1. a piece of wood of more length and breadth than thickness.
with the saw they sundred trees in board; and planks. ras.
every house has a board over the door, whereon is written
the number, sex, and quality of the persons living in it. temple.
go now, go trust the wind's uncertain breath,
remov’d four fingers from approaching death;
or seven at most, when thickest is the board.
2. a table. [from burdd, welch.]
soon after which, three hundred lords he slew,
of british blood, all fitting at his board. fairy queen.
in bed he slept not, for my urging it;
at board he fed not, for my urging it. shakspeare.
i'll follow thee in fun'ral flames; when dead,
my ghost shall thee attend at board and bed. sir j. denham.
cleopatra made antony a supper, which was sumptuous and
royal; howbeit there was no extraordinary service upon the
board. hakewill on providence.
may ev'ry god his friendly aid afford;
pan guard thy flock, and ceres bless thy board.
3. entertainment; food.
4. a table at which a council or court is held.
both better acquainted with affairs, than any other who sat
then at that board. - clarendon.
5. an assembly seated at a table; a court of jurisdiction.
i wish the king would be pleased sometimes to be present at
that board; it adds a majesty to it. bacon.
6. the deck or floor of a ship; on board signifies in a ship.
now board to board the rival vessels row,
the billows lave the skies, and ocean groans below. dryd.
our captain thought his ship in so great danger, that he
confessed himself to a capuchin, who was on board. addisor.
he ordered his men to arm long poles with sharp hooks,
wherewith they took hold of the tackling, which held the
mainyard to the mast of their enemy's ship; then, rowing
their own ship, they cut the tackling, and brought the main-
yard by the board. a, buthnot on coins.
to board. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to enter a ship by force; the same as to storm, used of a city.
i boarded the king's ship : now on the beak,
now in the waste, the deck, in every cabin,
i flam'd amazement.
he not inclin'd the english ship to board,
more on his guns relies than on his sword,
from whence a fatal volley we receiv'd ;
it miss'd the duke; but his great heart it griev'd.
arm, arm, she cry’d, and let our tyrians board
with our's his fleet, and carry fire and sword. denham.
2. to attack, or make the first attempt upon a man; aborder
quelqu'un, fr.
whom thus at gaze, the palmer 'gan to board
with goodly reason, and thus fair bespake. fairy queen.
away, i do beseech you, both away;
i'll board him presently. shakespecre's hamlet.
sure, unless he knew some strain in me, that i knew not
myself, he would never have boarded me in this fury. shakesp.
they learn what associates and correspondents they had,
and how far every one is engaged, and what new ones they
meant afterwards to try or board. bacon's henry vii.
3. to lay or pave with boards.
having thus boarded the whole room, the edges of some
boards lie higher than the next board; therefore they peruse
the whole floor; and, where they find any irregularities, plane
them off. moxon's mechanical exercises.
to board. v. n. to live in a house, where a certain rate is
paid for eating.
that we might not part,
as we at first did board with thee,
now thou wouldst taste our misery. herbert.
we are several of us, gentlemen and ladies, who board in the
same house ; and, after dinner, one of our company stands up,
and reads your paper to us all. spectator.
to board, v. a. to place as a boarder in another's house.
boa rd-
fairy queen.
dryden.
dryden.
prizr.
shakespeare.
j/aller.
shakes?-are-
a word of terrour; from bo, an old northern cap-
tain, of such fame, that his name was used to terrify the
temple.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 275</div><p class="text">b o a
b o c
-
!
cit
7.
o
o:
-
boar n w ages. m. s. [from board and wages.j wages allowed
to servants to keep themselves in victuals.
what more than madness reigns,
when one short sitting many hundreds drains,
and not enough is left him, to supply
board-wages, or a footman's livery : dryden.
bo'ar d f r. m. s. [from board.] a tabler; one that eats with
another at a settled rate,
bo'arding-school. n.s.. [from board and school.] a school
where the scholars live with the teacher. it is commonly
used of a school for girls.
a blockhead, with melodious voice,
in boarding schools can have his choice. swift.
bo'ar is h. adj. [from boar.] swinish ; brutal; cruel.
i would not see thy cruel nails
pluck out his poor old eyes; northy fierce sister,
in his anointed flesh stick boarish phangs. shakspeare.
to boast. v. n. [bost, welch.]
1. to brag; to display one's own worth, or adions, in great
words. -
let not him that putteth on his harness, boost himself as he
that putteth it off. kings.
the sprits beneath, o
whom i seduc’d, boasting i could subdue
th’ omnipotent. milton.
2. to talk offentatiously.
for i know the forwardness of your mind, for which i boast
of you to them of macedonia. 1 car. ix. 2.
3. it is used commonly with of.
my sentence is for open war, of wiles
more incxpert i log/? not. milton.
4. sometimes with in.
they boast in mortal things, and wond'ring tell
of babel, and the works of memphian kings. milton.
some surgeons i have met, carrying bones about in their
pockets, bea/sing in that which was their shame. //iseman.
5. to exalt one's self.
thus with your mouth you have boosted against me, and mul-
tiplied your words against me. ezek. xxxv. 13.
to boas r. v. a.
1. to brag of; to display with ostentatious language.
for if i have boy!ed any thing to him of you, i am not
ashamed. 2 cor. vii. 14.
- neither do the spirits damn'd
lose all their virtue, lest bad men should boost
their specious deeds. milton.
f they vouchsafed to give god the praise of his goodness;
yet they did it only, in order to boy; the interest they had in
him. 4tterbury.
2. to magnify ; to exalt.
they that trust in their wealth, and bogs; themselves in the
multitude of their riches. psalm xlix. 6.
confounded be all them that serve graven images, that boast
themselves of idols. psalm xcvii. 7.
boast. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. an expression of ostentation ; a proud speech.
thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the
law dishonourest thou god : rom. ii. 23.
the world is more apt to find fault than to commend; the
boast will probably be censured, when the great action that oc-
casioned it, is forgotten. ” speciator.
2. a cause of boasting; an occasion of pride; the thing boasted.
not tyro, nor mycene, match her name,
nor great alcmena, the proud boas's of fame. pope.
bo'ast e.r. m. s. [srom boast.] a bragger; a man that vaunts
any thing ostentatiously. - -
complaints the more candid and judicious of the chymists
themselves are wont to make of those boosiers, that confidently
pretend, that they have extracted the salt or sulphur of quick-
silver, when they have disguised it by additaments, wherewith
it resembles the concretes. boyle.
no more delays, vain boaster! but begin;
i prophesy beforehand i shall win :
i’ll teach you how to brag another time. dryden.
he the proud boasters sent, with stern assault,
down to the realms of night. philips.
bo'ast ful. adj. [from boast and full.] ostentatious; inclined
to brag.
fol. and rough, your first son is a 'squire;
the next a tradesman, meek, and much a liar.
bo'ast ingly. adv. [from boasting.] ostentatiously.
we look on it as a pitch of impiety, boostingly to avow our
sins; and it deserves to be considered, whether this kind of con-
fessing them, have not some affinity with it. decay of piety.
boat. n.s.. [bat, saxon.]
1. a vessel to pass the water in. it is usually distinguished from
other vessels, by being smaller and uncovered, and commonly
moved by rowing.
i do not think that any one nation, the syrian excepted, to
whom the knowledge of the ark came, did find out at once
the device of either ship or boat, in which they durst venture
themselves upon the seas. raleigh's effyi.
pope.
an effeminate scoundrel multitude
whose utmost daring is to cross the nile,
in painted boats, to fright the crocodile. tate, juv.
2. a ship of a small size; as, a passage boat, parquet boat, advoce
boat, fly boat. .
boation. m. s. [from leare, lat.] roar; noise; loud
sound.
in messina insurrection, the guns were heard from thence as
far as augusta and syracuse about an hundred italian miles,
in loud boations. derhan's physico-theoloy.
bo’atman. }"s. [from beat and man.] he that manages a
bo'at's man. boat.
boassmen through the crystal water show,
to wond'ring passengers, the walls below. dryden.
that booby phaon only was unkind,
an ill-bred boatman, rough as waves and wind. prior.
bo'atswai n. m. s. [from boat and swain..] an officer on board
a ship, who has charge of all her rigging, ropes, cables, an-
chors, sails, flags, colours, pendants, &amp;c. he also takes care
of the long-boat and its furniture, and steers her either by
himself or his mate. he calls out the several gangs and com-
panies to the execution of their watches, works, and spells;
and he is also a kind of provost-marshal, seizes and punishes
all offenders, that are sentenced by the captain, or court-mar-
tial of the whole fleet. harris.
sometimes the meanest boatswain may help to preserve the
ship from sinking. howe's pre-eminence of parliament.
to bob. v. a. [of uncertain etymology; skinner deduces it from
bobo, foolish, span.]
1. to cut. junius. whence tobtail.
2. to beat; to drub ; to bang.
those bastard britons, whom our fathers
have in their own land beaten, bolv'd, and thump'd. shak.
3. to cheat; to gain by fraud.
i have balled his brain more than he has beat my bones. sh.
live, roderigo ! -
he calls me to a restitution large, **
of gold and jewels, that i lobb’d from him,
as gifts to desdemona. shakespeare.
here we have been worrying one another, who should have
the booty, till this cursed fox has bobbed us both on’t. l’esir.
7% bob. v. n. to play backward and forward; to play loosely
against any thing.
and sometimes lurk i in a gossip's bowl,
in very likeness of a roasted crab ;
and when she drinks, against her lips i hob,
and on her wither'd dewlap pour the ale. 4siosam. n. dr.
they comb, and then they order ev'ry hair;
a birthday jewel bobbing at their ear. drydon.
you may tell her,
i'm rich in jewels, rings, and bobbing pearls,
pluck'd from moors ears. dryden.
bob. m. s. (from the verb neuter.]
1. something that hangs so as to play loosely; generally an or-
nament at the ear; a pendant; an ear-ring.
the gaudy gossip, when she's set agog, .
in jewels drest, and at each end a bob. dryden.
2. the words repeated at the end of a stanza.
to bed, to bed, will be the bab of the song. l'e/irange.
3. a blow.
i am sharply taunted, yea, sometimes with pinches, nips, and
bobs. a/cham's schoolmaster.
4. a mode of ringing. -
bo'bin. m. s. [babine, fr. from bombyx, lat..] a small pin of
wood, with a notch, to wind the thread about when women
weave lace.
the things you follow, and make songs on now, should be
sent to knit, or sit down to bobbins, or bonelace. tatler.
bo'bbinwok k. m. s. [from bobbin and work.] work woven with
bobbins.
not netted nor woven with warp and woof, but after the
manner of bobbinwork. grew's musæum.
bo'bcherry. m. s. [from bob and cherry..] a play among chil-
dren, in which the cherry is hung so as to bob against the
mouth.*
bobcherry teaches at once two noble virtues, patience and
constancy; the first, in adhering to the pursuit of one end ;
the latter, in bearing a disappointment. arbuth, and pope.
b'opt ai l. n. s. [from bob, in the sense of cut.] cut tail; short
tail.
avaunt, you curs
be thy mouth or black or white,
or bobtail tike, or trundle tail,
- tom will make him weep and wail. shakespeare.
bo'btai led. adj. [from bobtail.] having a tail cut, or short.
there was a boltailed cur cried in a gazette, and one that
found him, brought him home to his master. l'estrange.
bo'bw g. n.s. (from bob and wig. } a short wig.
a young fellow riding towards us full gallop, with a hobw'z.
and a black silken bag tied to it stopt short at the coach to ask
us how far the judges were behind. - spectator.
boscasis e. m. s. a sort of linen cloth; a fine buckram. do?.
bo'cke let.
7
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 276</div><p class="text">b o d
b o g
bo'ckelet.
bocke ret n, s. a kind of long-winged hawk. dict.
t, bode. v. a. [boban, sax.] to portend; to be the omen
of. it is used in a sense of either good or bad.
this bodes some strange eruption to our state. hamlet.
you have opposed their false policy, with true and great
wisdom; what they boded would be a mischief to us, you are
providing, shall be one of our principal strengths. spratt's ser.
it happen'd once, a boding prodigy |
a swarm of bees that cut the liquid sky,
upon the topmast branch in clouds alight.
if fiery red his glowing globe descends,
high winds and furious tempests he portends:
but if his cheeks are swoln with livid blue,
he bodes wet weather by his watry hue.
to bode. v. n. to be an omen; to foreshew.
sir, give me leave to say, whatever now
the omen prove, it boded well to you. dryden.
bo'dement. n.s.. [from bode..] portent; omen'; prognostick.
this foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl
makes all these bodements. shakespeare.
macbeth shall never vanquisht be, until
great birnam wood to dunfinane's high hill
shall come against him
that will never be:
sweet bodements, good. shakespeare.
to bodge. v. n. [a word in shakespeare, which is perhaps cor-
rupted from boggle.] to boggle; to stop; to fail.
with this we charg’d again; but out ! alas,
we bodg’d again; as i have seen a swan,
with bootless labour, swim against the tide. shakespeare.
bo'nice. n.s.. [from bodies.] stays; a waistcoat quilted with
whalebone, worn by women.
her bodice half way she unlac'd,
about his arms she slily cast
the silken band, and held him fast. prior.
this consideration should keep ignorant nurses and bodice
makers from meddling. locke.
bo'diless. adj. [from body.] incorporeal; having no body.
they bodiles, and immaterial are,
dryden.
dryden.
and can be only lodg’d within our minds. davies.
this is the very coinage of our brain,
this bodiles creation ecstasy
is very cunning in. shakespeare.
these are but shadows,
phantoms bodiles, and vain,
empty visions of the brain.
bo'n ily. adj. [from body.]
1. corporeal; containing body.
what resemblance could wood or stone bear to a spirit void
of all sensible qualities, and bodily dimensions f south.
2. relating to the body, not the mind.
of such as resorted to our saviour christ, being present on
earth, there came not any unto him with better success, for the
benefit of their souls everlasting happiness, than they whose
bodily necessities gave occasion of seeking relief. hooker.
virtue atones for bodily defects; beauty is nothing worth,
without a mind. l’estrange.
as clearness of the bodily eye doth dispose it for a quicker
sight; so doth freedom from lust and passion, dispose us for the
most perfeoł acts of reason. tillotson.
i would not have children much beaten for their faults, be-
cause i would not have them think bodily pain the greatest pu-
swift,
nishment. locke.
3. real ; actual. -
whatever hath been thought on in this state,
that could be brought to bodily act, ere rome
had circumvention. shakespeare.
bo'd ily. adv. corporeally; united with matter.
it is his human nature, in which the godhead dwells bodily,
that is advanced to these honours, and to this empire. jwatts.
bo dkin. n.s.. [boddiken, or small body, skinner.]
1. an instrument with a small blade and sharp point, used to bore
holes.
each of them had bodkins in their hands, wherewith conti-
nually they pricked him. sidney.
2. an instrument to draw a thread or ribband through a loop.
or plung'd in lakes of bitter washes lie,
or wedg’d whole ages in a bodkin's eye. pope.
3. an instrument to dress the hair.
- you took constant care
the bodkin, comb, and essence to prepare:
for this your locks in paper-durance bound. pope.
bo'dy. n.s.. [bobis, saxon; it originally signified the height
or stature of a man.]
1. the material substance of an animal, opposed to the immate-
rial soul.
all the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the
body of saul, and the bodies of his sons, from the wall. sam.
take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what
ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on.
matthew.
by custom, practice, and patience, all difficulties and hard-
ships, whether of body or of fortune, are made easy. l’eir.
2. matter ; opposed to spirit.
3. a person; a human being: whence somebody and nobody.
surely, a wise body's part it were not, to put out his fire, be-
cause his foolish neighbour, from whom he borrowed where-
with to kindle it, might say, were it not for me, thou wouldst
freeze. hooker.
a deflow’red maid "
and by an eminent body, that enforc'd
the law against it! shakespeare.
'tis a passing shame,
that i, unworthy body as i am,
should censure thus on lovely gentlemen. shakespeare.
no body seeth me; what need i to fear the most high
will not remember my fins. ecclus.
all civility and reason obliged every body to submit. clarena.
good may be drawn out of evil, and a body's life may be
saved, without having any obligation to his preserver. l’eir.
4. reality; opposed to representation: a scriptural sense.
a shadow of things to come; but the body is of christ. colos.
5. a colle&amp;tive mass; a joint power.
there is in the knowledge both of god and man this cer-
tainty, that life and death have divided between them the
whole body of mankind. hooker.
there were so many disaffeoted persons of the nobility, that
there might a body start up for the king. clarendon.
when pigmies pretend to form themselves into a body, it is
time for us, who are men of figure to look about us.
addison's guardian,
6. the main army; the battle; distinet from the wings, van
and rear.
the van of the king's army was led by the general and
wilmot; in the body was the king and the prince; and the
rear consisted of one thousand foot, commanded under colonel
thelwell. clarendon.
7. a corporation; a number of men united by some common
tye.
i shall now mention a particular, wherein your whole body
will be certainly against me, and the laity, almost to a man,
on my side. swift.
nothing was more common, than to hear that reverend
body charged with what is inconsistent, despised for their po-
verty, and hated for their riches. swift.
8. the main part; the bulk: as, the body, or hull, of a ship;
the body of a coach; the body of a church; the body, or trunk,
of a man; the body, or trunk, of a tree.
thence sent rich merchandizes by boat to babylon, from
whence, by the body of euphrates, as far as it bended west-
ward, and, afterward, by a branch thereof. raleigh.
this city has navigable rivers, that run up into the body of
italy; they might supply many countries with fish. aid.
9. a substance; matter as distinguished from other matter.
even a metalline body, and therefore much more a vegeta-
ble or animal, may, by fire, be turned into water. boyle.
10. [in geometry.] any solid figure.
11. a pandect; a general collection: as, a body of the civil law;
a body of divinity.
12. strength; as, wine of a good body.
body-cloaths... n.s.. [from body and cleaths.] cloathing for
horses that are dieted.
i am informed, that several asses are kept in body-cleaths,
and sweated every morning upon the heath. addison.
to bo dy. v. a. [from the noun..] to produce in some form.
as imagination bodies forth
the forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
turns them to shape. shakespeare.
bog.. n.s.. [bog, soft, irish, bague, french..] a marish; a mo-
rass; a ground too soft to bear the weight of the body.
through fire and through flame, through ford and whirl-
pool, o'er bog and quagmire. shakespeare,
a gulf profound ! as that serbonian bog,
betwixt damiata and mount casius old. milton.
he walks upon bogs and whirlpools; wheresoever he treads,
he sinks. south.
learn from so great a wit, a land of bogs
with ditches fenc'd, a heaven fat with fogs. dryden.
he is drawn, by a sort of ignis satuus, into bogs and mire al-
most every day of his life. //atts.
bog-trotter. n. s. [from bog and trot.] one that lives in a
boggy country. -
to bo'ggle. v. n. [from bogil, dutch, a spectre; a bugbear;
a phantom.
1. to start; to fly back; to fear to come forward.
you boggle shrewdly; every feather starts you. shakoff,
we start and boggle at every unusual appearance, and cannot
endure the fight of the bugbear. glanville.
nature, that rude, and in her first essay,
stood boggling at the roughness of the way;
us’d to the road, unknowing to return,
goes boldly on, and loves the path when worn. dryden.
2. to hesitate ; to be in doubt.
6 and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 277</div><p class="text">b o i
b o l
and never $oggle to restore
the members you deliver o'er, -
upon demand. - hudibras.
the well-shaped changeling is a man that has a rational
foul, say you. make the ears a little longer, and more point-
ed, and the nose a little flatter than ordinary; and then you be-
gin to boggle. locke.
3. to play fast and loose ; to dissemble.
when summoned to his last end, it was no time for him to
boggle with the world. howel.
bo ggler. m. s. [from boggle.] a doubter; a timorous man.
you have been a boggler ever. shakespeare.
bo go y. adj. [from bog.] marshy; swampy.
their country was very narrow, low, and baggy, and, by
great industry and expences, defended from the sea. arbuthnot.
bo g hous e. m. s. [from bog and house.j a house of office.
boh e. a. n.s.. [an indian word.) a species of tea, of higher
colour, and more astringent taste, than green tea.
coarse pewter, consisting chiefly of lead, is part of the
bales in which bohea tea was brought from china. j/oodward.
as some frail cup of china’s fairest mold,
the tumults of the boiling bohea braves,
and holds secure the coffee's sable waves.
she went from op'ra, park, assembly, play,
to morning walks, and pray'rs three hours a-day;
to part her time 'twixt reading and bohea,
tickell.
to unuse and spill her solitary tea. pope.
to bo, l. v. n. [bouiller, fr. bullio, lat.]
1. to be agitated by heat; to fluctuate with heat.
he saw there boil the firy whirlpools. chapman.
suppose the earth removed, and placed nearer to the sun, in
the orbit of mercury, there the whole ocean would boil with
extremity of heat. bentley.
2. to be hot ; to be fervent, or effervescent.
that strength with which my boiling youth was fraught,
when in the vale of balasor i fought. dryden.
well i knew,
what peri's youthful ardour would pursue,
that boiling blood would carry thee too far. dryden.
3. to move with an agitation like that of boiling water.
then headlong shoots beneath the dashing tide,
the trembling fins the boiling waves divide. gay.
4. to be in hot liquor, in order to be made tender by the heat.
fillet of a fenny snake,
in the cauldron boil and bake.
5. to cook by boiling.
if you live in a rich family, roasting and boiling are below
the dignity of your office, and which it becomes you to be ig-
norant of. swift.
6. to bail over. to run over the vessel with heat.
a few soft words and a kiss, and the gobd man melts; see
how nature works and boils over in him. congreve.
this hollow was a vast cauldron, filled with melted matter,
which, as it boiled over in any part, ran down the sides of the
mountain. - - aa'dison on italy.
to boil. v. a. to heat, by putting into boiling water; to
feeth.
to try whether seeds be old or new, the sense cannot in-
form; but if you boil them in water, the new seeds will sprout
sooner. alacon.
in eggs boiled and roasted, into which the water entereth not
at all, there is scarce any differente to be discerned. bacon.
poll. n. s. see bile.
bosil ary. m. s. [from to boil.] a place at the salt-works where
the salt is boiled.
boil. er. m. s. [from boil.]
1. the person that boils any thing.
that such alterations of terrestrial matter are not impossible,
seems evident from that notable practice of the boilers of salt-
petre. boyle.
2. the vessel in which anything is boiled.
this coffee-room is much frequented ; and there are gene-
rally several pots and boilers before the fire. j/oodward.
bo'sterous. adj. [hysier, furious, dutch.]
1. violent ; loud ; roaring; stormy.
by a divine instinet, mens minds mistrust
ionsuing danger; as by proof we see
the waters swell before a boisserous storm. shakespeare.
as when loud winds a well grown oak would rend
up by the roots, this way and that they bend
his reeling trunk, and with a bois' rous sound
shakespeare.
scatter his leaves, and strew them on the ground. waller.
2. turbulent; tumultuous; furious.
spirit of peace,
wherefore do you so ill translate yourself
out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace,
into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war shakespeare.
his sweetness won a more regard
unto his place, than all the boist’rous moods
that ignorant greatness practiseth.
god, into the hands of their deliverer,
purs invincible might,
vol. 1.
ben. johnson,
to quell the mighty of the earth, th' oppressor,
the brute and boist'rous force of violent men. milt:#,
still must i beg thee not to name sempronius:
lucia, i like not that loud bafterous man. addison.
3. unwieldy; clumsily violent.
his boisterous club, so buried in the ground,
he could not rearen up again so light,
but that the knight him at advantage found.
4. it is used by woodward of heat; violent.
when the sun hath gained a greater strength, the heat be-
comes too powerful and boisterous for them. natural history.
bozovo. adv. [from boisterous.] violently; tumultu-
ously.
a sceptre snatch'd with an unruly hand,
must be as boisterously maintain'd, as gain'd. shakespeare.
those are all remains of the universal deluge, when the wa-
ter of the ocean, being boisterously turned out upon the earth,
bore along with it all moveable bodies. j/32dward.
another faculty of the intellect comes loßerously in, and
wakes me from so pleasing a dream. swift.
bo'1st erousness. m. s. [from boisterous.] the state or quality
of being boisterous ; tumultuousness; turbulence.
bo'lary. adj. [from bole..] partaking of the nature of bole, or
clav.
a weak and inanimate kind of loadstone, with a few mag-
netical lines, but chiefly consisting of a holary and clammy sub-
stance. brown's pugar erreurs.
bold. adj. [bals, saxon.]
1. daring; brave; stout; courageous; magnanimous; fearless;
intrepid.
the wicked flee when no man pursueth; but the righteous
are bold as a lion. proverbs,
i have seen the councils of a noble country grow bold, or ti-
morous, according to the fits of his good or ill health that ma-
naged them. temple.
2. executed with spirit, and without mean caution.
these, nervous, bold; those, languid and remiss. roscom.
the cathedral church is a very bold work, and a master-
piece of gothick archite&amp;ture. addison on italy-
3. confident; not scrupulous; not timorous.
we were bold in our god to speak unto you the gospel of
god with much contention. 1 thessalonians.
i can be bold to say, that this age is adorned with some men
of that judgment, that they could open new and undiscovered
ways to knowledge. locke.
4. impudent; rude.
in thy prosperity he will be as thyself, and will be bold over
thy servants. if thou be brought low, he will be against thee.
ecclus,
5. licentious; such as shew great liberty of fiction, or expression.
fairy queen,
the figures are bold even to temerity. cowley.
which no bold tales of gods or monsters swell,
but human passions, such as with us dwell. waller.
6. standing out to the view ; striking to the eye.
catachreses and hyperboles are to be used judiciously, and
placed in poetry, as heightnings and shadows in painting, to
make the figure bolder, and cause it to stand off to sight. drya.
7. o smooth; even; level: a sailor’s term.
er dominions have bold accessible coasts. fiowel.
8. to make bold. to take freedoms: a phrase not grammatical,
though common. to be bold is better; as, i was bold to tell
the house that scandalous livings make scandalous ministers.
- rudgerd.
i have made bold to send to your wife;
my suit is, that she will to desdemona
procure me some access. shakespeare.
making so bold,
my fears forgetting manners, to unseal
their grand commission. shakespeare.
and were y' as good as george a green,
i shall make bold to turn agen. hudibrar.
i durst not make thus bold with ovid, lest some future mih-
bourn should arise. - dryden.
some men have the fortune to be esteemed wits, only for
making bold to scoff at these things, which the greatest part of
mankind reverence. tillotson.
to bold en. v. a. [from bold.] to make bold; to give con-
fidence.
quick inventers, and fair ready speakers, being boldened with
their present abilities, to say more, and perchance better too,
at the sudden, for that present, than any other can do, use less
help of diligence and study. aftham's schoolmaster.
i am much too vent’rous,
in tempting of your patience; but am bolden'd
under your promis'd pardon. shakespeare.
bo ldf ace. n.s.. [from bold and face.1 impudence; sauciness:
a term of reproach and reprehension.
how, now, boldface / cries an old trot; sirrah, we eat our
own hens, i'd have you know; what you eat, you steal.
l'e/orange.
bo'ldfa.ced. adj. [from bold and face.] impudent.
i have seen those fillicit of creatures; and, fecing their rare
3 h works,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 278</div><p class="text">b o l
b o l
works, i have seen enough to confute all the boldfaced atheists
of this age. bramhall against hobbes.
bool dly. adv. [from bols.) - .
1. in a bold manner; with courage; with spirit.
thus we may boldly speak, being strengthened with the ex-
ample of so reverend a prelate. . . . hooker.
s speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
stirr'd up by heav'n, thus boldly for his king. shakespeare.
2. it may perhaps be sometimes used in a bad sense, for impu-
donty.
boot psess. n.s.. [from bold.] - -
1. courage; bravery ; intrepidity; spirit; fortitude; magnani-
mily; daringness. -
her horse she rid so, as might shew a fearful boldness, daring
to do that, which she knew not how to do. sidney.
2. exemption from caution, and scrupulous nicety.
the losins, of the figures is to be hidden, sometimes by the
address of the poet, that they may work their effect upon the
mind. dryden.
3. freedom ; liberty. -
great is my boldness of speech toward you; great is my glo-
rying in you. 2 corinthians.
4. confident trust in god.
our fear excludeth not that boldnes; which becometh saints.
hooker.
we have boldn's and access with confidence, by the faith
of him. ephesians.
having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by the
blood of jesus. hebrews.
5. assurance; freedom from bashfulness; confident mien.
wonderful is the case of boldness in civil business; what
first? boldness. what second and third bollness. and yet
boldness is a child of ignorance, and baseness, far inferiour to
other parts. bacon.
sure if the guilt were theirs, they could not charge thee
with such a gallant boldness: if 'twere thine,
thou couldst not heat’t with such a silent scorn. denham.
his distance, though it does not instruct him to think wiser
than other princes, yet it helps him to speak with more boldness
what he thinks. temple.
boliness is the power to speak or do what we intend, be-
fore others, without fear or disorder. locke.
6. impudence.
that moderation, which useth to suppress boldnes, and to
make them conquer that suffer. hooker.
bole. n. s.
1. the body or trunk of a tree.
all fell upon the high-hair'd oaks, and down their curled
brows
fell bustling to the carth; and up went all the boles and
boughs.
but when the smoother bole from knots is free,
we make a deep incision in the tree.
view well this tree, the queen of all the grove;
how vast her bole, how wide her arms are spread ;
how high above the rest she shoots her head î
2. a kind of earth.
bole armeniack is an astringent earth, which takes its name
from armenia, the country from which we have it. woodward.
3. a measure of corn, containing fix bushels.
of good barley put eight boles, that is, about fix english
quarters, in a stone trough. martimer.
bo lis. m. s. [latin.]
bolis is a great firy ball, swiftly hurried through the air, and
generally drawing a tail after it. aristotle calls it capra. there
have often been immense balls of this kind. muschenbroeck.
boll. n.s. a round stalk or stem; as, a toll of flax.
to boll. v. n. [from the noun..] to rise in a stalk.
and the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley
was in the ear, and the flax was bolled. exodus.
bo'lster. n.s. [bolrone, sax. bolster, dutch.]
1. something laid on the bed, to raise and support the head;
commonly a bag filled with down or feathers.
perhaps some cold bank is her bolster now,
or 'gainst the rugged bark of some broad elm
chapman.
dryden,
dryden.
leans her unpillow'd head. milton.
this arm shall be a bolster for thy head;
i'll fetch clean straw to make a soldier's bed. gay.
2. a pad, or quilt, to hinder any pressure, or fill up any vacuity.
up goes her hand, and off she slips
the bosiers that supply her hips.
3. a pad, or compress, to be laid on a wound.
the bandage is the girt, which hath a bolster in the middle,
and the ends tacked firmly together. wiseman.
... [in horsemanship.]
the bolsters of a saddle are those parts raised upon the bows,
to hold the rider’s thigh. farrier's dic?.
to bo lster. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to support the head with a bolster.
2. to afford a bed to.
mortal eyes do see them bols?er,
more than their own. shakespeare's othello.
swift.
3. to hold wounds together with a compress.
the practice of bolstering the cheeks forward, does little ser.
vice to the wound, and is very uneasy to the patient. sharp,
4. to support; to hold up ; to maintain. this is now an ex-
presfion somewhat coarse and obsolete.
we may be made wiser by the publick persuasions grafed
in men's minds, so they be used to further the truth, not to
bolster errour. hooker.
the lawyer sets his tongue to sale for the bollering out of
unjust causes. afake will.
it was the way of many to befter up their crazy, doating
consciences with confidences. - south.
bolt. n. s. [bcult, dutch ; 3axi;..]
1. an arrow ; a dart shot from a crossbow.
yet mark'd i where the bolt of cupid fell;
it fell upon a little western flower;
before milk-white, now purple with love's wound. shafs,
the blunted bolt against the nymph he drest; -
but, with the sharp, transfix’d apollo's breast.
2. lightning; a thunderbolt.
sing'd with the flames, and with the bolts transfix’d,
with native earth your blood the monsters mix’d. dryden.
3. bolt upright; that is, upright as an arrow.
brush iron, native or from the mine, consisteth of long
striae, about the thickness of a small knitting needle, bolt aft
right, like the bristles of a stiff brush. grew.
as i stood bolt upright upon one end, one of the ladies burst
out. - addison.
4. the bar of a door, so called from being straight like an ar-
row; we now, say, shoot the bolt, when we speak of fastening
or opening a door.
'tis not in thee, to oppose the bolt
against my coming in.
5. an iron to fasten the legs of a prisoner.
corrupted from bought, or link.
away with him to prison ; lay bolts enough upon him.
shakespeare.
dryden,
shakespeare.
this is i think
to bolt. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to shut or fatten with a bolt.
the bolted gates flew open at the blast;
the storm rush'd in, and arcite stood aghast.
2. to blurt out, or throw out precipitantly.
i hate when vice can bolt her arguments,
and virtue has no tongue to check her pride. amilton.
3. to fasten, as a bolt or pin ; to pin; to keep together.
that i could reach the axel, where the pins are,
which bolt this frame; that i might pull them out.
ben. johnson,
dryden,
4. to fetter; to shackle.
it is great
to do that thing that ends all other deeds,
which shackles accidents, and bolts up change. shakoff.
5. to sift; or separate the parts of any thing with a sieve.
[bluter, fr.]
he now had boulted all the flour. spensor.
in the bolting and fifting of fourteen years of power and fa-
vour, all that came out could not be pure meal. jj'atton.
i cannot bolt this matter to the bran,
as bradwardin and holy austin can. dryden.
6. to examine by fifting; to try out; to lay open.
it would be well bolted out, whether great refractions may
not be made upon reflections, as upon direct beams. bacon.
the judge, or jury, or parties, or the council, or attornies,
propounding questions, beats and bolts out the truth much better
than when the witness delivers only a formal series. hale.
time and nature will bolt out the truth of things, through
all disguises. l'e/orange.
7. to purify 5 to purge. this is harsh.
the fanned snow
that's bolted by the northern blast twice o'er. shakes rare.
to bolt. v. n. to spring out with speed and suddenness; to
start out with the quickness of an arrow.
this puck seems but a dreaming dolt,
still walking like a ragged colt,
and oft out of a bush doth bolt,
of purpose to deceive us. drayton.
they erected a fort, and from thence they bolted like beasts
of the forest, sometimes into the forest, sometimes into the
woods and fastnesses, and sometimes back to their den. bacon.
. as the house was all in a flame, out bolts a mouse from
the ruins, to save herself. l’estrange.
i have reflected on those men who, from time to time, have
shot themselves into the world. i have seen many successions
of them ; some bolting out upon the stage with vast applause,
and others hissed off. dryden.
the birds to foreign seats repair’d, .
and beasts, that bolted out, and saw the forest bar'd. dryden.
bolt-rope. m. s. [from bolt and rope.] the rope on which
the sail of a ship is sewed and fastened. sea dic.
bo lte r. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. a sieve to separate meal from bran or husks; or to separate
finer from coarser parts.
dowlas,
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 279</div><p class="text">b o m
b o n
so
as:
§:
i am;
lso
d}.
ons :
b.
attors.
ucht:
h.
, thos
in
"efti.
"...'..."
jiao."
co.;;"
dr.
jor
t; so
th. bo
mo
lto
to:
| so
lift."
s'. do
* on who
silo
to so
jo
dowlas, filthy dowlas: i have given them away to bakers
wives, and they have made boiters of them. shakespeare.
with a good strong chopping-knife mince the two capons,
bones and all, as small as ordinary minced meat; put them into
a large neat buller. bacon's natural hislory.
when superciliously he fifts
through coarsest bolter others gifts. hudibrar.
2. a kind of net.
these hakes, and divers others of the fore-cited, are taken
with threads, and some of them with the bolter, which is a
spiller of a bigger size. carew.
boolt head. n.s. a long strait-necked glass vessel, for chymi-
cal distillations, called also a matrass, or receiver.
this spirit abounds in salt, which may be separated, by put-
ting the liquour into a bolthead, with a long narrow neck. boyle.
bo lting-hous e. m. s. [from bolt and house.] the place where
meal is fifted.
the jade is returned as white, and as powdered, as if she
had been at work in a bolting house. dennis.
po lors prit. ! n. s. a mast running out at the head of a ship,
bowspr it. § not standing upright, but aslope. the but end
of it is generally set against the foot of the foremast; so that
they are a stay to one another. the length without board is
sufficient to let its sails hang clear of all incumbrances. if the
boltsprit fail in bad weather, the foremast cannot hold long after.
bowsprit is perhaps the right spell ng. sea dictionary.
sometimes i’d divide,
and burn in many places ; on the topmast,
the yards, and boltsprit, would i flame distinetly. shakesp.
boslus. n.s. [36xgp.] a form of medicine, in which the in-
gredients are made up into a soft mass, larger than pills, to be
iwallowed at once.
keep their bodies soluble the while by clysters, lenitive bo-
ises of casfia and manna, with syrup of violets. wiseman.
by poets we are well assur’d,
that love, alas! can ne'er be cur'd ;
a complicated heap of ills,
despising boluses and pills. swift.
bomb. m. s. [bombus, lat.]
1. a loud noise.
an upper chamber being thought weak, was supported by
a pillar of iron, of the bigness of one's arm in the midst ;
which, if you had struck, would make a little flat noise in
the room, but a great bomb in the chamber beneath. bacon.
2. a hollow iron ball, or shell, filled with gunpowder, and fur-
mished with a vent for a fusee, or wooden tube, filled with
combustible matter; to be thrown out from a mortar, which
had its name from the noise it makes. the fusee, being set
on fire, burns slowly till it reach the gunpowder, which goes
off at once, bursting the shell to pieces with incredible vio-
lence; whence the use of bombs in besieging towns. the
largest are about eighteen inches in diameter. by whom they
were invented is not known, and the time is uncertain, some
fixing it to 1588, and others to 1495. chambers.
the loud cannon missive iron pours,
and in the slaught’ring bomb gradivus roars. rowe.
to bomb. v. a. [from the noun..] to fall upon with bombs;
to bombard.
our king thus trembles at namur,
whilst villeroy, who ne'er afraid is,
to bruxelles marches on secure,
to bomb the monks, and scare the ladies. prior.
bomb-chest. n.s.. [from bomb and cheft.] a kind of chest
filled usually with bombs, and sometimes only with gunpow-
der, placed under ground, to tear and blow it up in the air,
with those who stand on it. chambers.
bom b-k etch. ; m. s. a kind of ship, strongly built, to bear the
bom b-vessel. v shock of a mortar, when bombs are to be
fired into a town.
nor could an ordinary fleet, with bomb-vessels, hope to suc-
ceed against a place that has in its arsenal gallies and men of
war. addison on italy.
bo'mbard. m. s. [b:mbardus, latin.]
1. a great gun; a cannon: it is a word now obsolete.
they planted in divers places twelve great bombards, where-
with they threw huge stones into the air, which, falling down
into the city, might break down the houses. knolles.
2. a barrel. obsolete.
to bom.b.a. r.d. v. a. [from the noun..] to attack with
bombs.
a medal is struck on the english failing in their attempts
on dunkirk, when they endeavoured to blow up a fort, and
bombard the town. addison.
bombard1 e.r. m. s. [from bombard.] the engineer whose
employment it is to shoot bombs.
the bombardier tosses his ball sometimes into the midst of a
city, with a design to fill all around him with terrour and com-
buftion. tatler.
bom.b.a. rdment. m. s. [from bombard.] an attack made upon
any city, by throwing bombs into it.
genoa is not yet secure from a bombardment, though it is
not so cxposed as formerly. - addison.
bo'mbasin. n.s.. [bombasin, fr. from bombycinus, silken, lat.]
a slight silken stuff, for mourning.
bo'mbast. m. s. [a stuff of soft loose texture used formerly to
swell the garment, and thence used to signify bulk or shew
without solidity.] fustian ; big words, without meaning.
not pedants motley tongue, soldiers bombass,
mountebanks drug-tongue, nor the terms of law,
are strong enough preparatives to draw
me to hear this. donnes
are all the flights of heroick poetry to be concluded bom-
baff, unnatural, and mere madness, because they are not af-
fe&amp;ted with their excellencies dryden.
bo mbast; adj. [from the substantive..] high sounding; of big
found without meaning.
he, as loving his own pride and purpose,
evades them with a bombass circumstance,
horribly stuff'd with epithets of war. shałespeare.
bo mbilation. n.s.. [from bombus, lat.] sound; noise; re-
port.
how to abate the vigour, or silence the bombilation of guns,
a way is said to be by borax and butter, mixt in a due propor-
tion, which will almost take off the report, and also the force
of the charge. brown's wulgar errours.
bomby'cinous. adj. [bombycinus, lat.] silken; made of silk.
bon4 roba. m.s. [ital, a fine gown.] a shewy wanton.
we knew where the bona rohas were. shakespeare.
bonasus. m. s. [lat.] a kind of buffalo, or wild bull.
bonchretien. m. s. [french..] a species of pear, so call-
ed, probably, from the name of a gardener.
bond. m. s. [bono, sax, bound; it is written indifferently, in
many of its senses, bond, or band. see band..]
1. cords, or chains, with which any one is bound.
there left me, and my man, both bound together;
till, gnawing with my teeth my bonds asunder,
i gain'd my freedom.
2. ligament that holds any thing together.
let any one send his contemplation to the extremities of
the universe, and see what conceivable hoops, what bond he
can imagine to hold this mass of matter in so close a pressure
together. locke.
3. union; connexion: a workman's term.
observe, in working up the walls, that no side of the house,
nor any part of the walls, be brought up three feet above the
other, before the next adjoining wall be wrought up to it, so
that they may be all joined together, and make a good bond.
shakespeare.
mortimer's husbandry. .
4. [in the plural.] chains; imprisonment; captivity.
whom i perceived to have nothing laid to his charge wor-
thy of death, or of bonds. acis, xxiii. 29.
5. cement of union; cause of union; link of connexion.
wedding is great juno's crown;
o blessed bond of board and bed | shakespeare.
love cools, brothers divide, and the bond is cracked 'twixt
son and father. shakespeare's king lear.
6. a writing of obligation to pay a sum, or perform a contract.
go with me to a notary, seal me there
your fingle bond.
what if i ne'er consent to make you mine;
my father's promise ties me not to time;
and bonds without a date, they say, are void. dryden.
7. obligation; law by which any man is obliged.
unhappy that i am i cannot heave
my heart into my mouth : i love your majest
according to my bond, no more nor less. shakespecre.
take which you please, it dissolves the bonds of govern-
ment and obedience. locke.
bon d. adj. [from bind, perhaps for bound; from 3ebonben,
saxon.] captive; in a servile state.
whether we be jews or gentiles, whether we be bond or
free. i cor. xii. 13.
bo'ndage. n.s.. [from bond.]
1. captivity; imprisonment; state of restraint.
you only have overthrown me, and in my bondage consists
shakespeare.
my glory. . sidney.
say, gentle princess, would you not suppose
your bondage happy, to be made a queen 2–
—to be a queen in bondage, is more vile
than is a slave in base servility. shakespeare.
our cage
we make a choir, as doth the prison'd bird,
and sing our bondage freely. shakespeare's cymbeline.
the king, when he design'd you for my guard,
resolv’d he would not make my bondage hard. dryden.
2. obligation; tye of duty.
if she has a struggle for honour, she is in a bondage to love;
which gives the story its turn that way. pope.
he must resolve by no means to be enslaved, and brought
under the bondage of observing oaths, which ought to vanish
when they stand in competition with eating and drinking, or
taking money. - south.
bo'ndmaid, n.s.. [from bond, captive, and maid.] a woman
slavc. 2.
good
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 280</div><p class="text">b o n
b o o
good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
to make a bondmaid and a slave of me. shakespeare. -
bo's om an. m. s. [from bond and man.] . a man slave. -
amongst the romans, in making of a bondman free, was it
not wondered wherefore so great ado should be made : the
master to present his slave in some court, to take him by the
hand, and not only to say, in the hearing of the publick
magistrate, i will that this man become free ; but, after those
folemn words uttered, to strike him on the cheek, to turn him
round, the hair of his head to be shaved off, the magistrate to
touch him thrice with a rod ; in the end, a cap and a white
garment given him. hooker.
o freedom | first delight of human kind;
not that which bondmen from their masters find. dryden.
bon d.se/r v a.n.t. n.s.. [from bond and servant..] a slave; a ser-
vant without the liberty of quitting his master.
and if thy brother, that dwelleth by thee, be waxen poor,
and be sold unto thee, thou shalt not compel him to serve as a
bonds rvant. - leviticus, xxv. 39.
bonds e(rv ice. n.s.. [from bond and service.] the condition of
a bondservant; slavery.
upon those did solomon levy a tribute of bonds rvice. kings.
bo'ndslav e. m. s. [from bond and slace..] a man in slavery ;
one of servile condition who cannot change his master.
love enjoined such diligence, that no apprentice, no, no
'bondslave, could ever be, by fear, more ready at all commands
than that young princess was. sidney.
all her ornaments are taken away; of a freewoman she is
become a bonoslave. 1 macc. ii. 1 1.
commonly the bondslave is fed by his lord, but here the lord
was fed by his bondslave. sir j. davies.
bo'ndsman. m. s. [from lond and man.]
1. a slave.
carnal greedy people, without such a precept, would have
no mercy upon their poor bond men and beasts. derham.
2. a person bound, or giving security for another.
bo'ndswom an. m. s. [from bond and woman.] a woman
slave.
my lords, the senators
are sold for slaves, and their wives for bondswomen.
* ben. johnson's catiline.
bone. n s. [ban, saxon.]
1. the solid parts of the body of an animal made up of hard
fibres, tied one to another by small transverse fibres, as those
of the muscles. in a foetus they are porous, soft, and easily
discerned. as their pores fill with a substance of their own
nature, so they increase, harden, and grow close to one an-
other. they are all spongy, and full of little cells, or are
of a considerable firm thickness, with a large cavity, except
the teeth; and where they are articulated, they are covered
with a thin and strong membrane, called the periosteum. each
bone is much bigger at its extremity than in the middle, that
the articulations might be firm, and the bones not easily put
out of joint. but, because the middle of the bone should be
strong, to sustain its allotted weight, and resist accidents, the
fibres are there more closely compacted together, supporting
one another; and the bone is made hollow, and consequently
not so easily broken, as it must have been had it been solid
and smaller. $2uincy.
thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold. macbeth.
there was lately a young gentleman bit to the bone. tatler.
2. a fragment of meat; a bone with as much flesh as adheres
to 1:.
like aesop's hounds, contending for the bone,
each pleaded right, and would be lord alone. dryden.
. to be upon the bones. to attack.
puss had a month's mind to be upon the bones of him, but
was not willing to pick a quarrel. l’e/irange.
4. to make no bones. to make no scruple: a metaphor taken
from a dog, who readily swallows meat that has no bones.
5. bones. a sort of bobbins, made of trotter bones, for weav-
ing bonelace.
6. bones. dice.
but then my study was to cog the dice,
and dext’rously to throw the lucky fice:
to shun ames ace that swept my stakes away;
and watch the box, for fear they should convey
false bones, and put upon me in the play. dryden.
7% bon f. v. a. [from the noun..] to take out the bones from
the flesh; as, the cooks boned the veal.
bo'nel ace. n.s. [from bone and lace; the bobbins with which
lace is woven being frequently made of bones.] flaxen lace,
such as women wear on their linen.
the things you follow, and make songs on now, should
be sent to knit, or sit down to bobbins or bonelace. tatler.
we destroy the symmetry of the human figure, and fool-
ishly contrive to call off the eye from great and real beauties,
to childish gewgaw ribbands and bonelace. speciator.
bo'nel ess, adj. [from bone..] wanting bones.
i would, while it was smiling in my face,
have pluckt my nipple from his bonels, gums,
and dasht the brains out. shakespeare,
to bo'neset. v. n. [from bone and set.] to restore a bone
out of joint to its place; or join a bone broken to the other
art.
a fractured leg set in the country by one pretending to
bonesetting. - wiseman's surgery.
bo'nesett er. m. s. [from bonest.] a chirurgeon; one who
particularly professes the art of restoring broken or luxated
bones.
at present my desire is to have a good bonesetter. denham.
bo'nfire. m. s. [from bon, good, fr. and fire.] a fire made
for some publick cause of triumph or exultation.
ring ye the bells to make it wear away,
and bonfires make all day. spenser.
how came so many bonfires to be made in queen mary's
days : why, she had abused and deceived her people. south.
full soon by bonfire, and by bell,
we learnt our liege was passing well. gay.
bo'ngrace. n s. [bonne grace, fr.] a forehead-cloth, or co-
vering for the forehead. not now used. skinner.
i have seen her beset all over with emeralds and pearls,
ranged in rows about her cawl, her peruke, her bongrace, and
chaplet. hakewill on providence.
bo'nnet. n.s.. [bonet, fr.] a covering for the head; a hat;
a cap.
go to them with this bonnet in thy hand,
and thus far having stretch'd it, here be with them,
thy knee busing the stones; for, in such business,
action is eloquence. shakespeare's coriolanus.
they had not probably the ceremony of vailing the bonnet
in their salutations; for, in medals, they still have it on their
heads. addison.
bo'nnet. [in fortification.] a kind of little ravelin, without
any ditch, having a parapet three feet high, anciently placed
before the points of the saliant angles of the glacis.
bo'nnet a prestre, or priest's cap, is an outwork, having at the
head three saliant angles, and two inwards.
bo'nnets. [in the sea language.] small sails set on the courses
on the mizzen, mainsail, and foresail of a ship, when these
are too narrow or shallow to cloath the mast, or in order to
make more way in calm weather. chambers.
bo'nnily. adv. [from bonny..] gayly; handsomely; plumply.
bo'nn in ess. n. s. [from bonny..] gayety; handsomeness;
plumpness.
bo'nn.y. adj. [from bon, bonne, fr. it is a word now almost
confined to the scottish dialect.]
i. handsome ; beautiful.
match to match i have encounter'd him,
and made a prey for carrion kites and crows,
ev’n of the bonny beast he lov’d so well.
thus wail'd the louts in melancholy strain,
till bonny susan sped across the plain. gay-
2. gay; merry; frolicksome; cheerful; blithe.
then figh not so, but let them go,
and be you blithe and bonny. shakespeare.
3. it seems to be generally used in conversation for plump.
bon ny-clabber. m. s. a word used in ireland for four but-
termilk.
we scorn, for want of talk, to jabber
of parties o'er our bonny-clabber;
nor are we studious to enquire,
who votes for manors, who for hire. swift.
bo'num magnum. n.s. a species of plum.
bo'ny. adj. [from bone.]
1. consisting of bones.
at the end of this hole is a membrane, fastened to a round
bony limb, and stretched like the head of a drum; and there-
fore, by anatomists, called tympanum. ray.
2. full of bones.
booby. n s, [a word of no certain etymology; henshaw thinks
it a corruption of bull-beef ridiculously; skinner imagines it
to be derived from bobo, foolish, span. junius finds bowbard
to be an old scottish word for a coward, a contemptible fellow;
from which he naturally deduces booby; but the original of
bowbard is not known.] a dull, heavy, stupid fellow; a
lubber.
but one exception to this fact we find,
that booby phaon only was unkind,
shakespeare.
an ill-bred boatman, rough as waves and wind. prior.
young master next must rise to fill him wine,
and starve himself to see the booby dine. king.
book. m. s. [boc, sax. supposed from boc, a beech; because
they wrote on beechen boards, as liber in latin, from the
rind of a tree.]
1. a volume in which we read or write.
see a book of prayer in his hand;
true ornaments to know a holy man. shakespeare.
receive the sentence of the law for fins,
such as by god's book are adjudg’d to death. , shakes care.
in the coffin that had the books, they were found as fresh
as if they had been but newly written; being written on parch-
ment, and covered over with watch candles of wax. bacon.
&amp;zki are a sort of dumb teachers; they cannot answer sud-
den
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 281</div><p class="text">b o o
b o o
:*
!-
it.
us to
so
so
h; to
, so !
o
solo.
jen questions, or explain present doubts: this is properly the
work of a living instructor. - . watts.
2. a particular part of a work. -
the first book we divide into seotions; whereof the first 1s
these chapters past. burnet's theory.
3. the register in which a trader keeps an account of his debts.
this life
is nobler than attending for a bauble;
prouder, than rustling in unpaid-for silk ;
such gain the cap of him that makes then fine, . .
yet keeps his book uncross'd. shakespeare.
4. in books. in kind remembrance.
i was so much in his books, that, at his decease, he left me
the lamp by which he used to write his lucubrations. addison.
5. 1/ithout book. by memory; by repetition; without reading.
sermons read they abhor in the church; but sermons with-
cat book, sermons which spend their life in their birth, and
may have publick audience but once. hooker.
to book. v. a. [from the noun..] to register in a book.
i beseech your grace, let it be booked with the rest of this
day’s deeds; or i will have it in a particular ballad else, with
mine own picture on the top of it. shakespeare.
he made wilful murder high treason; he caused the march-
ers to book their men, for whom they should make answer.
‘. . - davies on ireland.
*book-kr eping. m. s. [from book and keep.] the art of keeping
accounts, or recording pecuniary transactions, in such a man-
ner, that at any time a man may thereby know the true state
of the whole, or any part, of his affairs, with clearness and
expedition. - - harris.
booke inder. m. s. [from book and bind.] a man whose pro-
festion it is to cover books. :
bo’ok ful. adj. [from book and full.] full of notions gleaned
from books; crowded with undigested knowledge. -
the bootful blockhead, ignorantly read,
with loads of learned lumber in his head,
with his own tongue still caifies his ears, **
and always list’ning to himself appears. pope.
book is h. adj. [from book.] given to books; acquainted only
with books. it is generally used contemptuously.
* i'll make him yield the crown,
whose bookish rule hath pull'd fair england down. shakosh.
i’m not booksh, yet i can read waiting-gentlewoman in the
'scape. - shakespeare's j/inter's tale.
xantippe follows her namesake; being married to a bookish
man, who has no knowledge of the world. speciator.
book is hn ess. m. s. [from bookish..] much application to books;
over-studiousness.
bookle’arned. adj. [from book and learned.] versed in books,
or literature : a term implying some slight contempt.
whate'er these booklearn'd blockheads say,
solon's the veri'st fool in all the play. drydon.
he will quote passages out of plato and pindar, at his own
table, to some booklearned companion, without blushing. swift.
bookle arning. m. s. [from book and learning.] skill in lite-
rature ; acquaintance with books: a term of some contempt.
they might talk of booklearning what they would; but he
never saw more unfeaty fellows than great clerks. sidney.
neither does it so much require booklearning and scholarship,
as good natural sense, to distinguish true and false, and to
discern what is well proved, and what is not. burnet's theory.
book man. m. s. [from book and man.] a man whose profession
is the study of books.
this civil war of wits were much better us’d
on navarre and his bookmen; for here 'tis abus’d. shaks.
bo'o kmate. m. s. [from book and mate.] schoolfellow.
this armado is a spaniard that keeps here in court,
a phantasm, a monarch, and one that makes sport
to the prince and his booices. shakespeare.
books ellf. r. n. s. [from book and sill.] he whose profession
it is to scol books. -
he went to the books.ller, and told him in anger, he had sold
a book in which there was false divinity. !/alton.
bookwor m. m. s. [from book and worm.] -
1. a worm or mite that eats holes in books, chiefly when damp.
my lion, like a moth or backworm, feeds upon nothing but
paper, and i shall beg of them to diet him with wholesome and
substantial food. - guardian.
2. a student too closely given to books; a reader without judg-
ment.
among those venerable galleries and solitary scenes of the
university, i wanted but a black gown, and a salary, to be as
mere a bookworm as any there. pope's letters.
bosol y. m. s. [an irish term.]
all the tartarians, and the people about the caspian sea,
which are naturally scythians, live in hordes; being the very
same that the irish boolies are, driving their cattle with them,
and fecting only on their milk and white meats. speoser.
boo m. m. s. [from boom, a tree, dutch..] -
1. [in sea language.] a long pole used to spread out the clue of
the studding sail; and sometimes the clues of the mainsail and
foresail are boomet out.
vol. i.
* * -
2. a pole with bushes or baskets, set up as a mark to show the
sailors how to steer in the channel, when a country is over-
flown. sea dicionary.
3. a bar of wood laid across a harbour, to keep of the enemy.
as his heroick worth struck envy dumb,
whotock the dutchman, and who cut the boom. dryden.
to boom. v. n. [from the noun. a sea term.]
1. to rush with violence; as a ship is said to come booming,
when she makes all the sail she can. dics.
2. to swell and fall together.
booming o'er his head . . . -
the billows clos'd ; he's number'd with the dead. young.
... forsook by thee, in vain i fought thy aid,
when booming billows clos'd above my head. pope.
boos. m. s. [from bene, sax, a petition.] a gift; a grant; a
benefaction; a present.
vouchsafe me for my meed but one fair look:
a smaller boon than this i cannot beg,
and less than this, i'm sure, you cannot give. shakespeare.
that courtier, who obtained a boon of the emperor, that he
might every morning whisper him in the ear, and say nothing,
asked no unprofitable suit for himself. bacon.
the blust’ring fool has satisfy'd his will; -
his been is giv'n ; his knight has gain'd the day,
but lost the prize. dryden's fables.
what rhetorick didst thou use,
to gain this mighty boon p she pities me! addison's cato.
boon. adj. [bon; fr. j gay ; merry: as, a boon companion.
- satiate at length,
and heighten’d as with wine, jocund and boom,
thus to herself she pleasingly began. paradise loft.
i know the infirmity of our family; we play the boon com-
panion, and throw our money away in our cups. arbuthnot.
boor. m. s. [beer, dutch; 3:bune, sax.] a ploughman; a
country fellow ; a lout; a clown.
the bare sense of a calamity is called grumbling; and if a
man does but make a face upon the loor, he is presently a male-
coi) tellt. l'estrange.
he may live as well as a boor of holland, whose cares of
growing still richer waste his life. temple.
to one well-born, th’ affront is worse and more,
when he's abus'd and baffi'd by a boor. dryden.
book ish. adj. [from boar.] clownish; rustick; untaught;
uncivilized.
therefore, you clown, abandon, which is, in the vulgar,
leave the society, which, in the boorish, is, company of this
female. shakespeare's as you like it.
bo'or is hly. adv. [from boorish..] in a boorish manner; after
a clownish manner.
bo'o r1s hn ess. n. s. [from boorish.] clownishness; rusticity;
coarseness of manners. ‘. . .
boose. n.s.. [borio, sax.] a stall for a cow or an ox.
to boot. v. a. [baten, to profit, dutch ; bot, in saxon, is
recompence, repentance, or fine paid by way of expiation ;
botan is, to roent, or to compensate; as,
he r pir j bic and boxe,
ano bet bivojen bome.]
1. to profit; to advantage: it is commonly used in these modes,
it boots, or what boots it. - -
it shall not boot them, who derogate from reading, to excuse
it, when they see no other remedy; as if their intent were
only to deny that aliens and strangers from the family of god
are won, or that belief doth use to be wrought at the first in
them, without sermons. hooker.
for what i have, i need not to repeat;
and what i want, it boots not to conplain. shakespeare.
* - if we shun
the purpos'd end, or here lie fixed all, -
what boots it us these wars to have begun ? fairfax.
what boots the regal circle on his head,
that long behind he trails his pompous robe pope.
2. to enrich; to benefit.
and i will boot thee with what gift beside,
that modesty can beg. shakesp. aut. and cleopatra.
boot. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. profit; gain; advantage; something given to mend the ex-
change.
my gravity,
wherein, let no man hear me, i take pride,
could i, with boot, change for an idle plume,
which the air beats for vain. shakespeare,
2. to boat. with advantage; over and above ; besides.
canst thou, o partial sleep, give thy repose
to the wet seaboy, in an hour so rude;
and, in the calmest and the stillest night, *
with all appliances, and means to boot, -
deny it to a king shakespeare,
man is god’s image; but a poor man is
christ's stamp to boot: both images regard. herbert.
he might have his mind and manners formed, and be in-
structed to boot in several sciences. locke.
3. it seems, in the following lines, used for booty, or plunder.
- 3 i . others,<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 282</div><p class="text">b o r.
b c r
csthers, like foldiers, armed in their stings, -
make boot upon the summer's velvet buds. soft are.
boot. m. s. lhottas, armorick; betes, a shoe, welsh; lotte,
french.j
i. a covering for the leg, used by horsemen.
that my leg is too long— -
—no ; that it is too little.- -
— i'll wear a boot, to make it somewhat rounder. shosh.
shew'd him his room, where he must lodge that night,
pull'd off his boots, and took away the light. a filton.
bishop wilkins says, he does not question but it will be as
usual for a man to call for his wings, when he is going a jour-
pey, as it is now to call for his boots. addison's guardian.
2. a kind of rack for the leg, formerly used in scotland for tor-
turing criminals. -
boot of a coach. the space between the coachman and the
coach.
7, boot. v. a. [from the noun..] to put on boots.
bozt, boot, master shallow; i know the young king is sick
for me: let us take any man's horses. shakespeare.
boot-hose. m. s. [from boot and host.] stockings to serve for
boots; spatterdashes. -
his lacquey with a linen flock on one leg, and a boot-hose
on the other, gartered with a red and blue list. shakespeare.
boot-tree. m. s. [from boot and tree.] two pieces of wood,
shaped like a leg, to be driven into boots, for stretching and
widening them.
boot-carch er. m. s... [from bact and catch..] the person whose
business at an inn is to pull off the boots of passengers.
the ostler and the bootcatcher ought to partake. swift.
bo'or ed. adj. [from boot.] in boots; in a horseman's habit.
a booted judge shall sit to try his cause,
not by the statute, but by martial laws. dryden.
boot h. n.s. [ooed, dutch ; bowth, welch..] a house built of
boards, or boughs, to be used for a short time.
the clothiers found means to have all the quest made of
the northern men, such as had their booths in the fair. camden.
much mischief will be done at bartholomew fair, by the
fall of a booth. swift.
bo'on less. adj. [from boot.j
1. useless; unprofitable; unavailing; without advantage.
when those accursed messengers of hell
came to their wicked man, and 'gan tell
their bootless pains, and ill succeeding night. sponsor.
god did not suffer him, being desirous of the light of wis-
dom, with bootlos, expence of travel, to wander in darkness.
hooker.
bottles, speed,
when cowardice pursues, and valour flies. shakespeare.
let him alone;
i'll follow him no more with bootlos, pray'rs:
he seeks my life. shakespeare.
2. without success.
doth not brutus bootles, kneel? shakespeare.
thrice from the banks of wye,
and sandy bottom'd severn, have i sent
him bootless home, and weather beaten back. shakesp.
bo'ot y. m. s. [buyt, dutch ; butin, fr.]
1. plunder ; pillage ; spoils gained from the cnemy.
one way a band select from forage drives
a herd of beeves, fair oxen, and fair kine,
their booty. milton.
his conscience is the hue and cry that pursues him; and
when he reckons that he has gotten a booty, he has only caught
a tartar. l’estrange.
for, should you to extortion be inclin'd,
your cruel guilt will little booty find. dryden.
2. things gotten by robbery.
if i had a mind to be honest, i see, fortune would not suffer
me; she drops beaties in my mouth. shakspeare.
3. to play booty. to play dishonestly, with an intent to lose. the
french use, je sui; botte, when they mean to say, i will not go.
we understand what we ought to do; but when we deli-
... berate, we play booty against ourselves: our consciences direet
us one way, our corruptions hurry us another. l'e/irange.
i have set this argument in the best light, that the ladies
may not think that i write booty. drydon.
bope’ep. n. s. [from bo and peop.] the aet of looking out, and
drawing back as if frighted, or with the purpose to fright
some other.
then they for sudden joy did weep,
and i for sorrow sung,
that such a king should play bopep,
and go the fools among.
rivers,
that serve instead of peaceful barriers,
to part th' engagements of their warriours,
where both from side to side may skip,
and only encounter at booeep. hudibras.
there the devil plays at topop, puts out his horns to do
mischief, then shrinks them back for safety. dryden.
bq rae chio. m. s. sorraco, span.j a drunkard.
shakespeare.
how you slink of wine! dye think my niece will ever en-
dure such a borachio ! you’re an absolute borachio. congreve.
bo rable. adj. [from bore.] that may be bored. -
bo r.a.g.e. m. s. [from lorago, lat...] a plant. miller.
bo’ramez. n.s. the scythian lamb,
the name of agnus scythicus.
much wonder is made of the boramcz, that strange plant-
animal, or vegetable lamb of tartary, which wolves delight
to feed on ; which hath the shape of a lamb, affordeth a bloody
juice upon breaking, and liveth while the plants be consumed
about it. brown's pulgar errours.
bo r.a.x. m. s. [horax, low latin.] an artificial fait, prepared
from sal armoniac, nitre, calcined tartar, sea salt, and alum,
dissolved in wine. it is principally used to solder metals, and
fometimes an uterine ingredient in medicine. &amp;uincy.
bo'rd f1. {". j., [63rdeel, teut... bordel, armorick.] a bro-
bo'rdfllo. § thel; a bawdy-house.
from the bordello it might come as well,
the spital, or picthatch. ben. johnson.
making even his own house a flews, a bordel, and a school
of lewdness, to instil vice into the unwary years of his poor
children. south.
bot der. m. s. [lord, germ. lord, fr. j
1. the outer part or edge of any thing.
they have looking-glasses, bordered with broad lordr, of
crystal, and great counterfeit precious stones. bacon.
the light must flrike on the middle, and extend its greates:
clearness on the principal figures; diminishing by degrees, as
it comes nearer and nearer to the borders. dryden.
2. the march or edge of a country; the confine.
if a prince keep his residence on the border of his dominions,
the remote parts will rebel; but if he make the centre his seat,
he shall easily keep then in obedience. . speoser.
3. the outer part of a garment, generally adorned with needle-
work, or ornaments. -
4. a bank raised round a garden, and set with flowers; a nar-
row rank of herbs or flowers. -
there he arriving, round about doth fly
from bed to bed, from one to other bords,
and takes survey, with curious busy eye,
of every flower and herb there set in order.
all with a border of rich fruit-trees crown'd,
whose loaded branches hide the lofty mound:
such various ways the spacious alleys lead,
my doubtful muse knews not what path to tread. if aller.
7% bo r.d.e.r. v. n. [from the noun.] -
1. to confine upon ; to touch something else at the side or edge :
with upon.
it bordereth upon the province of croatia, which, in time
past, had continual wars with the turks garrisons. knolles.
virtue and honour had their temples bordering on each
other, and are sometimes both on the same coin. adaszz.
2. to approach nearly to.
all wit, which borders upon profaneness, and makes bol.1
with those things to which the greatest reverence is due, de-
serves to be branded with folly. tillotson.
to bo'rder. v. a.
1. to adorn with a border of ornaments.
2. to reach ; to touch ; to confine upon ; to be contiguous
to
generally known by
sponsor.
sheba and raamah are those parts of arabia, which border
the sea called the persian gulf. - raleig a.
bo'rderer. m. s. [from border.] he that dwells on the bor-
ders, extreme parts, or confines; he that dwells next to any
lace.
p they of those marches, gracious sovereign
shall be a wall sufficient to defend
our inland from the pilfering borderers. shakes care.
an ordinary horse will carry two sacks of sand ; and, of
such, the borderers on the sea do bestow sixty at least in every
acre; but most husbands double that number. coca--
the easicst to be drawn
to our society, and to aid the war:
the rather for their seat, being next lord"rers
on italy; and that they abound with horse. pen. josz.
the king of scots in person, with perkin in his company,
entered with a great army, though it chiefly consisted of lor-
derers, being raised somewhat suddenly. eacon.
volga's stream
sends opposite, in shaggy armour clad,
her borderers ; on mutual slaughter bent,
they rend their countrics. philor.
to bo r drage. v. n. [rom border.] to plunder the borders.
not in use.
long time in peace his realm established,
yet oft annoy’d with fundry bordragings
of neighbour scots, and foreign scatterlings.
to bore. v. a. [bo]man, sax.]
1. to pierce in a hole.
i'll believe as soon,
this whole earth nay be lor’d ; and that the moon
may through the centic cicep. shakoff care.
mulberries
sf -s:'a
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 283</div><p class="text">b c r.
b o r
mulberries will be fairer, if you bore the trunk of the tree
through, and thrust, into the places bored, wedges of some
hot trees. bacon.
but capys, and the graver sort, thought fit
the greeks suspected present to commit
to seas or flames ; at least, to search and bore
the sides, and what that space contains to explore. denham.
2. to hollow. -
take the barrel of a long gun, perfeotly bored, and set it
upright, and take a bullet exactly fit for it 3 and then if you
suck at the mouth of the barrel never so gently, the bullet
will come up so forcibly, that it will hazard the striking out
vour teeth. - digby.
. to make by piercing. -
these diminutive caterpillars are able, by degrees, to pierce
or bore their way into a tree, with very small holes; which,
after they are fully entered, grow together. ray.
4. to pierce, to break through.
consider, reader, what fatigues i’ve known,
what riots seen, what bustling crouds i bar'd,
how oft i cross'd where carts and coaches roar'd. gay.
to bor e. v. n.
1. to make a hole.
a man may make an instrument to bore a hole an inch wide,
or half an inch, not to bore a hole of a foot. jwilkins.
2. to push forward towards a certain point.
those milk paps,
that through the window bars bore at men's eyes,
are not within the leaf of pity writ. shakespeare.
nor southward to the raining regions run;
but boring to the west, and hov'ring there,
with gaping mouths they draw prolifick air. dryden.
to bor e. v. n. [with farriers..] is when a horse carries his nose
near the ground. dici.
bo r.e. n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. the hole made by boring. s
into hollow engines long and round,
thick ramm’d, at th' other bore with touch of fire
dilated, and infuriate.
2. the instrument with which a hole is bored.
so shall that hole be fit for the file, or square bore. moxon.
3. the size of any hole; the cavity; the hollow.
we took a cylindrical pipe of glass, whose bore was about
a quarter of an inch in diameter. - boyle.
our careful monarch stands in person by,
this new-cast cannon's firmness to explore;
the strength of big-corn d powder loves to try,
and ball and cartridge sorts for every bore. dryden.
it will best appear in the bores of wind instruments ; there-
fore cause pipes to be made with a single, double, and so on, to
a sextuple bore; and mark what tone every one giveth. bacon.
bor e. the preterite of bear.
the father bore it with undaunted soul,
like one who durst his destiny controu!';
yet with becoming grief he bore his part,
milton.
resign'd his son, but not resign'd his heart. dryden.
'twas my fate
to kill my father, and pollute his bed,
by marrying her who bore me. dryden.
bo'real. a j. [borealis, lat.] northern ; septentrional.
crete’s ample fields diminish to our eye;
before the boreal blasts the vessels fly. pope.
bo reas. m. s. [lat..] the north wind.
boreas, and caecas, and argestas loud,
and thrascias, rend the woods, and seas up-turn. milton.
bo's e.e. m. s. a kind of dance.
dick could neatly dance a jig,
but tom was best at borers. swift.
bo re r. m. s. [from bore..] a piercer; an instrument to make
holes with.
the master-bricklayer must try all the foundations, with
a borer, such as well-diggers use, to try the ground. a1,xon.
bo rn. the participle possive of bear.
their charge was always born by the queen, and duly paid
out of the exchequer. bacon.
the great men were enabled to oppress their inferiours ;
and their followers were born out and countenanced in wicked
a&amp;tions. davies.
upon some occasions, clodius may be bold and insolent,
born away by his passica. swift.
to be bor n. v. n. poss. [derived from the word to bear, in the
sense of bringing forth; as, my mother bore me twenty years
ago; or, i was born twenty years ago.j
x. to come into life.
- when we are born, we cry, that we are come
to this great stage of fools. shakespeare.
the new born babe by nurses overlaid. 1joyden.
nor nature's law with fruitless sorrow mourn,
but die, o mortal man for thou wast born. prior.
all that are born into the world, are surrounded with bodies,
that perpetually and diversy affect them. locke.
2. it is usually spoken with regard to circumstances; as, he was
o - s"
born a prince; he was born to empire; he was i:rn for gic:-
ness; that is, formcd at the birth.
the stranger that dwelleth with you, shall be unto you as
one born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself.
*. legiticus, xix. 34.
yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward. job.
a friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for ad-
versity. - - - proverbs.
either of you knights may well deserve
a princess born; and such is she you serve. dryden.
two rising crests his royal head adorn;
born from a god, himself to godhead born. jdrydon.
both must alike from heav'n derive their light;
these born to judge, as well as those to write. pope.
for all mankind alike require their grace;
all born to want; a miserable races pope.
i was born to a good estate, although it now turneth to little
2ccount. swift.
their lands are let to lords, who, never designed to be fe-
nants, naturally murmur at the payment of rents, as a sub-
serviency they were not born to. swift.
3. it has usually the particle of before the mother.
be bioctly, bold, and resolute, laugh to scorn
the pow'r of man ; for none of woman on
shall harm macbeth. sha's rare,
i being born of my father's first wife, and she of his third,
she converses with me rather like a daughter than a fiber.
- 7 at.or.
boroug h. m. s. sboyhoe, saxon.]
1. it signified anciently a surety, or a man bound for others.
a borough, as i here use it, and as the old laws still use, is
not a borough town, that is, a franchised town ; but a main
pledge of an hundred free persons, therefore called a free bo.
rough, or, as you say, fan-fligium. for both, in old saxon,
signifieth a pledge or surety ; and yet it is so used with us in
some speeches, as chaucer faith, st. john to borch; that is,
for assurance and warranty. speoser.
2. a town with a corporation.
and if a borough chuse him not undone, pope.
bo'rough english, is a customary descent of lands or tenements,
whereby, in all places where this custom holds, lands and tel
nements descend to the youngest son; or, if the owner have
no issue, to his youngest brother. • cowel.
bo rr el. n.s.. [it is explained by junius without etymology.]
a mean fellow.
siker thou speak's like a lewd sorrel,
of heaven to deemen so :
. howbe i am but rude and barrel,
yet nearer ways i know. sponsor.
to bo'rrow. v. a. [orgen, dutch ; boroan, saxon.j
i. to take soonething from another upon credit: opposed to
lend. -
he borrowed a box of the ear of the englishman, and swore
he would pay him again when he was able. shakespeare.
we have borrowed money for the king's tribute, and that
upon our lands and vineyards. nohemiah.
2. to ask of another the use of something for a time.
then he said, go, borrow thee vesic's abroad of all th9
neighbours. 2 kings.
where darknes and surprize made conquest cheap!
where virtue borrowed the arms of chanco,
and struck a random blow !
3. to take something belonging to another.
a borrow'd title hast thou bought too dear; -
why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king 2 sha's core.
they may borrow something of instruition even from their
pass guilt. - pecay of picty.
i was engaged in the translation of virgil, from whom i
have borrowed only two months. dryden.
these verbal signs they sometimes borrow from others, and
sometimes make themselves; as one may observe among the
new names children give to things. locke.
some persons of bright parts have narrow remembrance;
for having riches of their own, they are not solicitous to bor-
170 cu. //atts.
4. to use as one's own, though not belonging to one.
unkind and cruel, to deceive your son
in borrow'd shapes, and his embrace to shun. dryden.
bo'rrow. n s. [from the verb.] the thing borrowed.
yet of your royal presence i'll adventure
the burrow of a week.
bo'rrow r. m. s. [from borrow )
i. he that borrows ; he that takes monty upon trust: opp, ed
to lendor.
his talk is of nothing but of his poverty, for fear belike
left i should have proved a young borrower. sidny,
neither a borrower nor a lender be ; "
for loan of loses both itself and friend,
and borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
- go not my horse the better,
i must become a lorrower of the night
for a dark hour or two in.
d ryd**".
shakespeare.
s!...}}: a 7 a.
shos ear.
eut
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 284</div><p class="text">b o s .
b o t
rat you invert the cov’nants of her trust,
and harshly deal, like an ill borrower,
with that which you receiv'd on other terms. milton.
2. he that takes what is another's, and uses it as his own.
some sly, that i am a great borrower ; however, none of
my creditors have challenged me for it. pope.
boscag e. m. s. [ostage, fr.]
i. wood, or woodlands.
we bent our course thither, where we saw the appearance
of land; and, the next day, we might plainly discern that it
was a land flat to our fight, and full of bostage, which made
it shew the more dark. bacon.
2. the presentation of woods.
chearful paintings in feasting and banqueting rooms; gra-
ver stories in galleries; landskips and hostage, and such wild
works, in open terraces, or summer-houses. //otion.
bo'sky. adj. [!osite, fr.] woody.
and with each end of thy blue bow do's crown -
my bosy acres, and my unshrubb'd down. shaos?eare.
i know each land, and every alley green,
dingle, or bushy dell, of this wild wood,
and every boy bourn from side to fide. milton.
bo'som. m. s. [boyme, borom, sax.]
1. the embrace of the arms holding anything to the breast.
2. the breast; the heart.
our good old friend,
lay comforts to your bosom ; and bestow
your needful counsel to our businesses.
3. the solds of the dress that cover the breast.
put now thy hand into thy boson; and he put his hand into
his loom ; and when he took it out, behold his hand was le-
prous as snow. exodus, iv. 6.
4. inclosure; compass; embrace. -
unto laws thus received by a whole church, they which live
within the boson of that church, must not think it a matter in-
different, either to yield, or not to yield, obedience. i looker.
5. the breast, as the seat of the passions.
shakes care.
anger resteth in the bosoms of fools. eccles.
from jealousy's tormenting strife
for ever be thy bosom freed. prior.
unfortunate fallard' o, who can name
the pangs of rage, of sorrow, and of shame 3
that with mix'd tumult in thy bosom swell’d,
when first thou saw'st thy bravest troops repell'd ' addison.
here aciing bosoms wear a visage gay,
and stifled groans frequent the ball and play.
6. the breaft, as the seat of tenderness.
their soul was poured out into their mothers bosom. lam.
no further seek his virtues to disclose,
or draw his frailties from their dread abode;
there they alike in trembling hope repose,
the bosom of his father and his god. gray.
7. the breast, as the receptacle of secrets.
if i covered my transgress.on as adam, by hiding my iniquity
in my bosom. job.
8. any receptacle close or secret; as, the bosom of the earth ;
the bosom of the deep.
9. the tender affections ; kindness; favour. ."
whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
to pluck the common bosoms on his side. shakespeare.
to whom the great creator thus reply'd :
o son, in whom my soul hath chief delight;
son of my bosom, son who art alone
my word, my wisdom, and effectual might.
10. inclination; desire. not used.
if you can pace your wisdom
in that good path that i could wish it go,
you shall have your bosom on this wretch. shakespeare.
bosox1, in composition, implies intimacy; confidence ; fond-
ness. -
no more that thane of cawdor shall deceive
2%ung.
par. ly?.
our boson interes'; go, pronounce his death. shakoff.
this antonio,
being the osm-lover of my lord,
must needs be like my lord. shakes care.
those domestick traitors, bosom-thieves,
whom custom hath call'd wives; the readiest helps
to betray the heady husbands, rob the easy. hon. johns.
he sent for his hosom-friends,with whom he most confidently
consulted, and shewed the paper to them; the contents where-
of he could not conceive. clarendon.
the fourth privilege of friendship is that which is here spe-
cified in the text, a communication of secrets. a bosom-secret,
and a bosom of icnd, arc usually put together. south.
she who was a boson-friend of her royal mistress, he calls
an infolent woman, the worst of her sex. addison.
to bossom. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to inclose in the bosom.
boson up my counsci;
you'll find it wholesome.
i do not think my sister so to seek,
or so unprincipl’d in virtue’s book,
and the sweet peace that bosoms geodness ever.
shah off care.
a silion.
2. to conceal in privacy. - -
- the groves, the fountains, and the flow’rs,
that open now their choicest bosom'd smells,
reserv'd for night, and kept for thee in store.
towers and battlements it fees,
bosom'd high in tufted trees,
where perhaps some beauty lies, -
the cynosure of neighbouring eyes. milton
to happy convents, bosoma deep in vines,
where slumber abbots, purple as their wines. pope,
bo’son, n. s. [corrupted from boatswain.]
the barks upon the billows ride,
the master will not stay;
the merry boson from his side
his whistle takes, to check and chide
the ling’ring lad's delay.
boss. n. s. [base, fr.]
i. a stud; an ornament raised above the rest of the work; a
shining prominence. -
what signifies beauty, strength, youth, fortune, embroi.
dered furniture, or gaudy base, p l’esprange.
this ivory, intended for the loss of a bridle, was laid up
for a prince, and a woman of caria or maeonia dyed it. pope.
2. the part rising in the midst of any thing. i
he runneth upon him, cven on his neck, upon the thick
bosses of his bucklers. -- job, xv. 26.
3. a thick body of any kind. . . . • * * . -
a boss made of wood, with an iron ‘hook, to hang on the
laths, or on a ladder, in which the labourer puts the mortar
at the britches of the tiles. 4/oxon.
if a close appuise be made by the lips, then is framed m ;
if by the boss of the tongue to the palate, near the throat,
then k. - - holder.
bo'ss agf. m. s. [in archite@ture.]
1. any stone that has a projecture, and is laid in a place in a
building to be afterwards carved. -
2. rustick work, which consists of stones, which seem to advance
beyond the naked of a building, by reason of indentures or
channels left in the joinings: these are chiefly in the corners
of edifices, and called rustick quoins. builder's dic’.
bo's v el. n.s. a species of crowfoot.
b. ta'n scal, ; adj. [from £oravn, an herb.] relating to herbs =
bot a nick. skilled in herbs.
some botanical criticks tell us, the poets have not rightly
followed the traditions of antiquity, in metamorphosing the
sisters of phaeton into poplars. addison-
bo tanist. m. s. [from botany.] one skilled in plants; one
who studies the various species of plants.
the uliginous lacteous matter, taken notice of by that di-
ligent botanisł, was only a collection of corals. " i/2-dward-
then spring the living herbs, beyond the power
of botanist to number up their tribes. thomson.
botano logy. n.s. [3oravox.oysz.] a discourse upon plants-
dic’.
botany. n.s.. [from gordon, an herb.] the science of plants =
that part of natural history which relates to vegetables.
bota'rgo. m. s. [botarga, span.] a relishing sort of foo",
made of the roes of the mullet fish; much used on the coasts
of the mediterranean, as an incentive to drink. chambers.
botch. n.s.. [bozza, pronounced botza, ital.]
1. a swelling or cruptive discoloration of the skin.
time, which rots all, and makes both's pox,
and, plodding on, must make a calf an ox,
boydn •
hath made a lawyer. donna,
botches and blains must all his flesh imboss,
and all his people. milton.
it proves far more incommodious, which, if it were prope-
led in boils, botches, or ulcers, as in the scurvy, would rather
conduce to health. harvey.
2. a part in any work ill finished, so as to appear worse than
the rest.
with him,
to leave no rubs or botches in the work,
fleance, his son, must embrace the fate. shakes care.
3. an adscititious, adventitious part clumsily added.
if both those words are not notorious botches, i am deceived,
though the french translator thinks otherwise. drydon.
a comma ne'er could claim
a place in any british name;
yet, making here a perfeot botch,
thrusts your poor vowel from his notch. swift.
to botch. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to mend or patch clothes clumsily.
their coats, from botching newly brought, are torn. dryan.
2. to mend any thing awkwardly.
to botch up what th' had torn and rent, -
religion and the government. hudibrar.
3. to put together unsuitably, or unskilfully; to make up of
unsuitable pieces.
- go with me to my house,
and hear thou there, how many fruitless pranks
this ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby
may smile at this. shakes rare.
her
par, loft.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 285</div><p class="text">b o t
her speech is nothing,
yet the unshaped use of it doth move
the hearers to collection; they aim at it, -
and botch the words up fit to their own thoughts. shakesp.
for treason botch'd in rhime will be thy bane;
rhime is the rock on which thou art to wreck. dryden.
4. to mark with botches.
young hylas, botch'd with stains too foul to name,
in cradle here renews his youthful frame. garth.
bootch er. m. s. [from botch..] a mender of old clothes; the
same to a taylor as a cobler to a shoemaker.
he was a botcher's prentice in paris, from whence he was
whipt for getting the sheriff's fool with child. shakespeare.
botchers left old cloaths in the lurch,
and fell to turn and patch the church. hudibras.
boochy. adj. [from botch.3 marked with botches.
and those boils did run—say so—did not the general run ?
were not that a botchy core ? shakespeare.
bor e. m. s. [bote, sax. a word now out of use.]
1. a compensation or amends for a man slain, which is bound
to another. cowel.
2. it was used for any payment.
boor h. adj. [bazu, bazpa, sax.] the two; as well the one as
the other. et l'un &amp; l'autre, fr. it is used only of two.
and the next day, both morning and afternoon, he was kept
by our party. sidney.
moses and the prophets, christ and his apostles, were in
their times all preachers of god's truth; some by word, some
by writing; some by both. hooker.
which of them shall i take :
both o one or neither neither can be enjoy'd,
if both remain alive. - shakespeare.
two lovers cannot share a single bed;
as therefore both are equal in degree,
the lot of both he left to destiny. dryden.
a venus and a helen have been seen,
b.th perjur’d wives, the goddess and the queen. granville.
both. conj. [from the adjective..] as well: it has the conjunc-
tion and to correspond with it.
a great multitude both of the jews and also of the greeks
believed. acis.
pow'r to judge both quick and dead. milton.
both the boy was worthy to be prais'd,
and stimichon has often made me long,
to hear, like him, so sweet a song, dryden.
boor ryoi d. adj. [6%uotion;..] having the form of a bunch of
grapes.
the outside is thick set with botryoid efflorescencies, or small
knobs, yellow, bluish, and purple; all of a shining metallick
hue. //oodward.
bots. m. s. [without a singular.] a species of small worms in the
cntrails of horses; answering, perhaps, to the ascarides in hu-
man bodies. • *
pease and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is the
next way to give poor jades the bots. shakespeare.
bo’ttle, n.s. [bouteille, fr.]
1. a small vessel of glass, or other matter, with a narrow mouth,
to put liquor in.
the shepherd's homely curds,
his cold thin drink out of his leather bottle,
is far beyond a prince's delicates. shakespeare.
many have a manner, after other mens speech, to shake
their heads. a great officer would say, it was as men shake a
bottle, to see if there was any wit in their heads, or no. bacon.
then if thy ale in glass thou wouldst confine,
let thy clean bottle be entirely dry. king.
he threw into the enemy's ships earthen bottles filled with
serpents, which put the crew in disorder. arbuthnot on coins.
2. a quantity of wine usually put into a bottle; a quart.
sir, you shall stay, and take t'other bottle. speciator.
3. a quantity of hay or grass bundled up.
methinks i have a great desire to a bottle of hay ; good hay,
sweet hay, hath no fellow. shakspeare.
but i should wither in one day, and pass -
to a lock of hay, that am a bottle of grass. donne.
to bo ttl e. v. a. [from the noun...] to inclose in bottles.
you may have it a most excellent cyder royal, to drink or
to battle. amortimer.
when wine is to be bottled off, wash your bottles imme-
diately before you begin; but be sure not to drain them. swift.
foot tle is often compounded with other words; as, bottle-friend,
a drinking-friend; bottle-companion.
sam, who is a very good bottle-companion, has been the di-
version of his friends. addison.
bott le-f low er. m. s. [cyanus, lat.] a plant.
bo'+ t lescrew, n. s. [from bottle and screw.] a screw to pull
out the cork.
a good butler always breaks off the point of his bottles rew
in two days, by trying which is hardest, the point of the screw,
or the neck of the bottle. - swift.
bottom. m. s. [bozm, saxon; bodem, germ.]
1. the lowest part of any thing.
vol. i.
2. the ground under the water. . .
shallow brooks that flow'd so clear, .
the bottom did the top appear. i}ry 'n,
3. the foundation; the ground-work. - -
on this supposition my reasonings proceed, and cannot be
affected by objections which are far from being built on the
same bottom. - atterbury.
4. a dale; a valley; a low ground. -
• in the purlieus stands a sheep-cote,
west of this place; down in the neighbour bottom. shakes.
on both the shores of that fruitful bottom, are still to be
seen the marks of ancient edifices. allisn on italy.
equal convexity could never be seen : the inhabitants of
such an earth could have only the prospect of a little circular
plain, which would appear to have an acclivity on all sides;
so that every man would fancy himself the lowest, and that he
always dwelt and moved in a bottom. bently.
5. the part most remote from the view; the deepest part.
his proposals and arguments should with freedom be exa-
mined to the bottom, that, if there be any mistake in them,
no body may be misled by his reputation. locke.
6. bound; limit.
but there's no bottom, none,
in my voluptuousness. sha's care.
7. the utmost extent or profundity of any man's capacity, whe-
ther deep or shallow.
i will fetch off these justices: i do see the bottom of justice
shallow: how subject we old men are to lying ! shakespeare.
8. the last resort; the remotest cause; first motion.
he wrote many things which are not published in his name;
and was at the bottom of many excellent counsels, in which he
did not appear. audson,
9. a ship; a vessel for navigation.
a bawbling vessel was he captain of,
with which, such scathful grapple did he make
with the most noble bottom of our fleet. shakespeare.
my ventures are not in one bottom trusted;
nor to one place. shakespeare.
we have memory, not of one ship that ever returned, and
, but of thirteen persons only, at several times, that chose to
return in our bottoms. bacon.
he's a foolish seaman,
that when his ship is sinking, will not
unlade his hopes into another bottom. denham.
he puts to sea upon his own bottom; holds the stern himself;
and now, if ever, we may expe&amp;t new discoveries. norris.
he spreads his canvas, with his pole he steers,
the freights of flitting ghosts in his thin bottom bears. dryd.
10. a chance; an adventure; state of hazard.
he began to say, that himself and the prince were too much
to venture in one bottom. clarendon.
we are embarked with them on the same bottom, and must
be partakers of their happiness or misery. spectator.
ii. a ball of thread wound up together.
this whole argument will be like bottoms of thread, close
wound up. bacon.
silkworms finish their bottoms in about fifteen days. a sort.
each christmas they accounts did clear,
and wound their bottom round the year. prior.
12. bottom of a lane. the lowest end.
13. bottom of beer. the grounds, or dregs.
to bo'tto m. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to build upon; to fix upon as a support : with on.
they may have something of obscurity, as being bottom'd
apon, and fetched from the true nature of the things. hale.
pride has a very strong foundation in the mind; it is bot-
tomed upon self-love. collier.
the grounds upon which we bottom our reasoning, are but
a part; something is left out, which should go into the rec-
koning. - locke.
action is supposed to be bottomed upon principle. atterbury.
2. to wind upon something; to twist thread round some-
thing.
*therefore, as you unwind your love for him,
left it should ravel, and be good to none,
you must provide to bottom it on me. shakes ears.
to boot to m. v. n. to rest upon as its ultimate support.
find out upon what foundation any proposition, advanced,
bottoms; and observe the intermediate ideas, by which it is
joined to that foundation upon which it is erected. locke.
bottom ed. adj. [from bottom.] having a bottom; it is usu-
ally compounded.
there being prepared a number of flat-bottomed boats, to
transport the land-forces, under the wing and protection of
the great navy. bacon.
bosttomless. adj. [from bottom.] without a bottom; fa-
thomless.
wickedness may well be compared to a bottomlos fit, into
which it is easier to keep one’s self from falling, than being
fallen, to give one’s self any stay from falling infinitely. sidney.
is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom
then be my passions *g with them. shakespeare.
3
him
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 286</div><p class="text">b o u
b o u
ilim the almighty pow'r
hurl’d headlong, flaming from th’etherial sky,
to bottomless perdition. milton.
bottom ry. r. s. [in navigation and commerce.] the act of
borrowing money on a ship's bottom; that is, by engaging the
vessel for the repayment of it, so as that, if the ship miscarry,
the lender loses the money advanced ; but if it arrives safe at
the end of the voyage, he is to repay the money lent, with a
certain premium" or interest agreed on ; and this on pain of
forfeiting the ship. harris.
bouchet. n.s. [french j a sort of pear.
boud. n. s. an insect which breeds in malt; called also a
weevil. dic7.
to boug e. v. n. [bouge, fr.] to swell out.
bou gh. n. s. sbox, sax, the gh, is mute.] an arm or large
shoot of a tree, bigger than a branch, yet not always distin-
uished from it.
a vine-labourer, finding a bough broken, took a branch of
the same bough, and tied it about the place broken. sidney.
their lord and patron loud did him proclaim,
and at his feet their laurel boughs did throw. fairy queen.
from the bough
she gave him of that fair enticing fruit. milton.
as the dove's flight did guide honeas, now
may thine conduct me to the golden bough. denham.
under some fav'rite myrtle's shady boughs,
they speak their passions in repeated vows. roscommon.
see how, on every bough, the birds express,
in their sweet notes, their happiness. dryden.
'twas all her joy the ripening fruits to tend,
and see the boughs with happy burdens bend. pope.
bought. preter. and participle of to buy; which see.
the chief were these who not for empire fought,
but with their blood their country's safety bought.
boug ht. n.s.. [from to bow.]
1. a twist; a link; a knot.
his huge long tail wound up in hundred folds,
whose wreathed boughts whenever he unfolds,
and thick entangled knots adown does slack. fairy queen.
immortal verse,
such as the meeting soul may pierce,
in notes, with many a winding bought
of linked sweetness, long drawn out.
2. a flexure.
the flexure of the joints is not the same in elephants as in
other quadrupeds, but nearer unto those of a man; the bought
of the fore-legs not directly backward, but laterally, and
somewhat inward. brown's vulgar errours.
bou'illon. m. s. [french.] broth; soup; any thing made
to be supped : a term used in cookery.
bo'ulder walls. [in architecture.] walls built of round flints or
pebbles, laid in a strong mortar; used where the sea has a beach
cast up, or where there are plenty of flints. build. dicf.
to boult. v. a. see to bolt.
to bounce. v. n. [a word formed, says skinner, from the
sound.]
1. to fall or fly against any thing with great force, so as to re-
bound.
the fright awaken'd arcite with a start,
against his bosom bounc'd his heaving heart. dryden.
2. to spring ; to make a sudden leap ; a sudden explosion.
high nonsense is like beer in a bottle, which has, in reality,
no strength and spirit, but frets, and flies, and bounces, and
pope.
milton.
imitates the passions of a much nobler liquor. addison.
they bounce from their nest,
no longer will tarry. swift.
out bounc'd the mastiff of the triple head;
away the hare with double swiftness fled. swift.
3. to make a sudden noise.
just as i was putting out my light, another bounces as hard
as he can knock. swift.
4. to boast; to bully: a sense only used in familiar speech.
5. to be bold, or strong. -
forsooth the bouncing amazon,
your buskin'd mistress, and your warriour love,
to theseus must be wedded. shakespeare.
bounce. n. s. [from the verb.]
1. a strong sudden blow.
the bounce burst ope the door; the scornful fair
relentless look'd.
2. a sudden crack or noise.
what cannoneer begot this lusty blood
he speaks plain cannon fire, and smoke, and bounce;
dryden.
he gives the bastinado with his tongue. shakespeare.
two hazel-nuts i threw into the flame,
and to each nut i gave a sweetheart's name;
this with the loudest bounce me sore amaz'd,
that in a flame of brightest colour blaz'd. gay.
3. a boast; a threat: in low language.
bouncer. m. s. [from bounce.] a boaster; a bully; an empty
threatener: in colloquial speech.
bound. n.s.. [from bind.]
1. a limit; a boundary; that by which anything is terminated.
illimitable ocean without bound; -
without dimension; where length, breadth, and height,
and time, and place, are lost. milton.
those vast scythian regions were separated by the natural
bounds, of rivers, lakes, mountains, woods, or marshes. temple.
indus and ganges, our wide empire's bounds,
swell their dy'd currents with their natives wounds. dryd, n.
through all th’ infernal bounds,
which flaming phlegethon surrounds,
sad orpheus sought his consort lost.
2. a limit by which any excursion is restrained.
hath he set bounds between their love and me *
i am their mother, who shall bar me from them : shao.
stronger and fiercer by restraint he roars,
and knows no lound, but makes his pow'r his shores. den!.
any bounds made with body, even adamantine walls, are far
from putting a stop to the mind, in its progress in space. lock.
3. [from to bound, v. n.) a leap ; a jump; a spring.
do but note a wild and wanton herd,
or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
fetching mad bound, bellowing, and neighing loud. slak.
the horses started with a sudden bound,
and flung the reins and chariot to the ground. alijan.
dex'trous he 'scapes the coach with nimble bounds,
whilst ev'ry honest tongue stop thief resounds. gay.
4. a rebound ; the leap of something flying back by the force of
the blow.
these inwat disgusts are but the first bound of this ball of
contention. decay of piety.
to bound. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to limit; to terminate.
a lofty tow'r, and strong on every fide,
with treble walls, which phlegethon surrounds,
whose fiery flood the burning empire bounds.
2. to restrain; to confine.
take but degree away,
the bounded waters
would lift their bosoms higher than the shores,
and make a top of all this solid globe.
3. sometimes with in.
my mother's blood
runs on the dexter check, and this sinister
bound; in my sire's.
to bound. v. n. [bondir, fr.]
i. to jump 5 to spring; to move forward by leaps.
torrismond appear'd,
gave me his hand, and led me lightly o'er,
leaping and bounding on the billows heads.
before his lord the ready spaniel bounds,
panting with hope, he tries the furrow'd grounds.
when sudden through the woods a bounding stag
rush'd headlong down, and plung’d amidst the river. rowe.
warbling to the vary'd strain, advance
pope.
dryden.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
dryden.
pope.
two sprightly youths, to form the bounding dance. pope.
2. to rebound; to fly back by repercussion.
mark then a bounding valour in our english,
that being dead, like to the bullets grazing,
breaks out into a second course of mischief. shakoshcare.
to bou nd. v. a. to make to bound.
if i might buffet for my love, or bound my horse for her fa-
vours, i would lay on like a butcher, and fit like a jackanapes,
never off. shakespeare.
lf love, ambitious, sought a match of birth,
whose veins bound richer blood than lady blanch
boun d. preterite and participle passive of bind.
nay, said pamela, none shall take that office from myself,
shak.
being so much bound as i am for my education. sidney.
this is antonio,
to whom i am so infinitely bound.—
—you should in all sense be much bound to him;
for, as i hear, he was much bound for you. shakespeare.
the gentleman is learn'd, a most rare speaker,
to nature none more bound. shakespeare.
the bishops of hungary, being wonderfully rich, were
bound to keep great numbers of horsemen, which they used to
bring into the field. knolles.
they summoned the governor to deliver it to them, or
else they would not leave one stone upon another. to which
the governor made no other reply, than that he was not bound
to repair it; but, however, he would, by god's help, keep
the ground afterwards. clarendon.
bound. adj. [a word of doubtful etymology.] destined; in-
tending to come to any place.
his be that care, whom most it doth concern,
said he , but whither with such hasty flight
art thou now bound?' for well might i discern
great cause, that carries thee so swift and light. f. qseen.
to be bound for a port one desires extremely, and sail to it,
with a fair gale, is very pleasant. temple.
willing we sought your shores, and hither bound,
the port so long desir’d, at length we found. dryden.
bo'undary.
i
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 287</div><p class="text">b o u
*
so
bo und1n g-ston e.
bo und-ston e.
bo undary. m. s. [from bound..] limit; bound.
he suffers the confluence and clamours of the people to pass
all boundaries of laws, and reverence to his authority.
- king charles.
sensation and refle&amp;tion are the boundaries of our thoughts;
beyond which the mind, whatever efforts it would make, is
not able to advance. locke.
great part of our fins consist in the irregularities attending
the ordinary pursuits of life; so that our reformation must ap-
pear, by pursuing them within the boundaries of duty. rogers.
of unden. participle passive of bind. not now much in use.
hereafter, in a better world than this,
i shall desire more love and knowledge of you.-
—i rest much bounden to you: fare you well. shakespeare.
we also most humbly befought him to accept of us as his
true servants, by's just a right as ever men on earth were
4 ounsen. bacon.
to be careful for a provision of all necessaries for ourselves,
and those who depend on us, is a bounden duty. rogers.
} n. s. a stone to play with.
i am past a boy;
a sceptre's but a play-thing, and a globe
a bigger bounding stone. dryden.
bo undlessness. n.s.. [from boundless.] exemption from limits.
god has correoted the boundlessness of his voluptuous desires,
by stinting his capacities. south.
bosu ndless. adj. [from bound.] unlimited; unconfined; im-
measurable ; illimitable.
beyond the infinite and boundles, reach
of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death,
art thou damn'd, hubert.
heav'n has of right all victory design'd;
whence boundless power dwells in a will confin'd. dryden.
man seems as boundless in his desires, as god is in his being;
and therefore nothing but god himself can satisfy him. south.
though we make duration boundles, as it is, we cannot ex-
tend it beyond all being. god fills eternity, and it is hard to
find a reason, why any one should doubt that he fills immen-
fity. - locke.
some guide the course of wand'ring orbs on high,
or roll the planets through the boundles; sky. pope.
bo'unteous, adj. [from bounty.] liberal; kind; generous;
munificent; benificent: a word used chiefly in poetry for
bountiful.
shakespeare.
every one,
according to the gift, which bounteous nature
hath in him clos'd.
her soul abhorring avarice,
bounteous; but almost bounteous to a vice. dryden.
bo'unteously. adv. [from bounteous.] liberally; generously ;
largely.
he bounteously bestow'd unenvy'd good
on me. dryden.
bo'unteousness. n. s. [from bounteous.] munificence; libe-
rality; kindness.
he filleth all things living with bounteousness. psalms.
bo'un tiful. adj. [from bounty and full.]
1. liberal; generous ; munificent.
as bountiful as mines of india. shakespeare.
if you will be rich, you must live frugal; if you will be po-
pular, you must be lountiful. taylor.
i am obliged to return my thanks to many, who, without
considering the man, have been bountiful to the poet. dryden.
god, the bountiful author of our being. locke.
2. it has of before the thing given, and to before the person re-
cc1v111.q.
ourking spares nothing, to give them the share of that feli-
city, of which he is so bountiful to his kingdom. dryden.
bo'untifully. adv. [from bountiful..] liberally; in a boun-
tiful manner; largely.
and now thy alms is giv'n,
and thy poor starv'ling bountifully fed. donne.
it is affirm’d, that it never raineth in egypt; the river
bountifully requiting it in its inundation. vulgar errours.
bo'un tifulness. n.s.. [from bountiful..] the quality of being
bountiful; generosity.
enriched to all bountifulness. 2 corinthians.
bo'untihead. ; n. s. [from bounty and head, or hood. see
shakespeare.
bo'unt 1 he de. hood.] goodness; virtue. it is now
bo unt 1 hood. wholly out of use.
this goodly frame of temperance,
formerly grounded, and fast settled
on firm foundation of true bountihead.
how shall frail pen, with fear disparaged,
conceive such sovereign glory, and great bountihood?
fairy queen.
botinty. n.s. [bonte, fr.]
1. generosity; liberality; munificence.
we do not so far magnify her exceeding bounty, as to affirm,
that she bringeth into the world the sons of men, adorned
with gorgeous attire, hooker.
fairy queen.
if you knew to whom you shew this honour,
i know you would be prouder of the work,
than customary bounty can enforce you.
such moderation with thy bounty join,
that you may'st nothing give, that is not thine. denham.
those godlike men, to wanting virtue kind,
bounty well plac’d preferr'd, and well design'd,
- to all their titles. dryden.
2. it seems distinguished from charity, as a present from an aons;
shakespeare.
being used, when persons, not absolutely necessitous, receive.
gifts; or when gifts are given by great persons.
tell a miser of bounty to a friend, or mercy to the poor, and
he will not understand it. south.
her majesty did not see this assembly so proper to excite
charity and compassion; though i question not but her royal
bounty will extend itself to them. addison.
to bo'urgeon. v. n. [bourgeonner, fr.] to sprout; to shoot
into branches; to put forth buds.
long may the dew of heaven distil upon them, to make
them bourgeon and propagate among themselves. howel.
o that i had the fruitful heads of hydra,
that one might bourgeon where another fell!
still would i give thee work | dryden.
bou rn. n.s.. [borne, fr.]
i. a bound; a limit.
bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none. shakspeare.
that undiscover'd country, from whose bourn
no traveller returns. shakes care.
false,
as dice are to be wish'd, by one that fixes
no bourn 'twixt his and mine. shakespeare.
i know each lane, and every alley green,
and every bosky bourn from side to side. milton.
2. [from burn, saxon.] a brook; a torrent; whence many
towns, seated near brooks, have names ending in boarn. it is
not now used in either sense; though the second continues in
the scottish diale&amp;t.
ne swelling neptune, ne loud thund'ring jove,
can change my cheer, or make me ever mourn;
my little boat can safely pass this perilous bourn. spensor.
to bouse. v. n. [buysen, dutch..] to drink lavishly; to tope.
as he rode, he somewhat still did eat,
and in hand did bear a bousing can,
of which he fipt. fairy queen.
bou's y. adj. [from bouse..] drunken.
with a long legend of romantick things,
which in his cups the bousy poet fings. dryden.
the guests upon the day appointed came,
each bouff farmer with his fimp'ring dame. king.
bout. m. s. [botta, ital.] a turn; as much of an adion as is
performed at one time, without interruption; a single part of
any action carried on by successive intervals.
the play began: pas durst not cosma chace;
but did intend next bout with her to meet, sidney.
ladies, that have your feet
unplagu'd with corns, we'll have a bout. shakespeare.
when in your motion you are hot,
as make your bouts more violent to that end,
he calls for drink. shakespeare.
if he chance to 'scape this dismal bout,
the former legatees are blotted out. dryden.
a weasel seized a bat; the bat begged for life: says the wea-
sel, i give no quarter to birds: says the bat, i am a mouse;
look on my body: so she got off for that bout. l’estrange.
we'll see when 'tis enough,
or if it want the nice concluding bout. king.
boutefeu. m. s. [french..] an incendiary; one who kindles
feuds and discontents. now disused.
animated by a base fellow, called john a chamber, a very
bout feu, who bore much sway among the vulgar, they entered
into open rebellion. bacon.
nor could ever any order be obtained impartially to punish
the known boutefeus, and open incendiaries. king charles.
besides the herd of boutefeus,
we set on work within the house. hudibras.
boutis ale. n. s. [i suppose from bouty or booty, and sale.] a
sale at a cheap rate, as booty or plunder is commonly sold.
to speak nothing of the great boutsale of colleges and
chantries. sir j. hayward.
bouts rimez. [french.] the last words or rhimes of a
number of verses given to be filled up.
to bow. v. a. [buzen, saxon.]
1. to bend, or inflect. it sounds as now, or how.
a threepence bow’d would hire me,
old as i am, to queen it. shakeshcare.
orpheus, with his lute, made trees,
and the mountain tops, that freeze, *
bow themselves when he did sing. shakespeare.
some bow the vines, which bury'd in the plain, ,
their tops in distant arches rise again. dryden.
the mind has not been made obedient to discipline, when
at first it was most tender and most easy to be bowed. locke.
2. to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
oil.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 288</div><p class="text">b o w
b o w
2. to bend the body in token of respea or submission.
they came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the
ground before him. 2 kings.
is it to how down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sack-
cloth and ashes under him wilt thou call this a fast, and an
acceptable day to the lord 2 isaiah.
3. to bend, or incline, in condescension.
let it not grieve thee to bow down thine ear to the poor,
and give him a friendly answer. ecclus.
4. to depress; to crush.
are you so gospell’d,
to pray for this good man, and for his issue,
whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave,
and beggar'd yours for ever ? shakespeare.
now wasting years my former strength confound,
and added woes may bow me to the ground.
to bow. v. n.
1. to bend; to suffer flexure.
2. to make a reverence.
rather let my head
stoop to the block, than these knees bow to any,
save to the god of heav'n, and to my king. shakespeare.
this is the great idol to which the world bows; to this we
pay our devoutest homage. decay of piety.
admir’d, ador’d by all the circling crowd,
for wheresoe'er she turn'd her face, they bow’d.
3. to stoop.
the people bowed down upon their knees, to drink. judges.
4. to sink under pressure.
they sloop, they bow down together ; they could not de-
liver the burden. isaiah, xlvi. 2.
bow. n.s. [from the verb. it is pronounced, like the verb, as
now, how.] an act of reverence or submission, by bending
the body.
some clergy too she wou'd allow,
nor quarrel'd at their awkward bow. swift.
bow. n.s. [pronounced as grow, no, lo, without any regard to
the w.
1. an into of war, made by holding wood or metal bent
with a string, which, by its spring, shoots arrows with great
force.
take, i pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow,
and go out to the field, and take me some venison. geness.
the white faith of hist'ry cannot show,
that e'er the musket yet could beat the bow.
alleyne's henry vii.
pope.
dryden,
2. a rainbow.
i do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of
a covenant between me and the earth. gen. ix. 13.
3. the instrument with which string-instruments are struck.
their instruments were various in their kind;
some for the bow, and some for breathing wind :
the sawtry, pipe, and hautboy's noisy band,
and the soft lute trembling beneath the touching hand.
dryden's fables.
4. the doubling of a string in a slip-knot. this is perhaps
corruptly used for bought.
make a knot, and let the second knot be with a bow. josem.
5. a yoke.
as the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb, and the faul-
con his bells, so man hath his desire. shakespeare.
6. bow of a saddle. the bows of a saddle are two pieces of wood
laid archwise, to receive the upper part of a horse's back, to
give the saddle its due form, and to keep it tight. farrier's d.
7. bow of a ship. that part of her which begins at the loof,
and compassing ends of the stern, and ends at the sternmost
parts of the forecastle. if a ship hath a broad bow, they call
it a bold bow; if a narrow thin bow, they say she hath a lean
bow. the piece of ordnance that lies in this place, is called
the bowpiece ; and the anchors that hang here, are called her
great and little bowers.
8. bow is also a mathematical instrument, made of wood, for-
merly used by seamen in taking the sun's altitude.
9. bow is likewise a beam of wood or brass, with three long
screws, that direet a lath of wood or steel to any arch ; used
commonly to draw draughts of ships, projections of the sphere,
or wherever it is requisite to draw long arches. harris.
bow-bearer. m. s. [from bow and bear.] an under-officer of
the forest. cowel.
bow-bent. adj. [from bow and bent.] crooked.
a sibyl old, how-bent with crooked age,
that far events full wisely could prefage. milton.
bow-h and. m. s. [from bow and hand.] the hand that draws
the bow.
surely he shoots wide on the bow-hand, and very far from
the mark. spenser's ireland.
bow-legged. adj. [from bow and leg.] having crooked legs.
bow-shot. n.s.. [from bow and shot..] the space which an ar-
row may pass in its flight from the bow.
though he were not then a bow-shot off, and made haste;
yet, by that time he was come, the thing was no longer to be
scen. 7 boyle.
bo'wels. m. s. [boyaux, fr.] -
1. intestines; the vessels and organs within the body.
he smote him there with in the fifth rib, and shed cut his
bowels. 2 sam. xx. 1 o-
2. the inner parts of any thing.
had we no quarrel else to rome, but that
thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all
from twelve to seventy; and pouring war
into the bowels of ungrateful rome,
like a bold flood appear. shakespeare.
his soldiers spying his undaunted spirit,
a talbot ' talbot cried out amain,
and rush'd into the bowels of the battle. shakespeare.
as he saw drops of water distilling from the rock, by fol-
lowing the veins, he has made himself two or three fountains
in the bowels of the mountain. zaayan.
3. the seat of pity, or kindness.
his bowels did yern upon him. geness.
4. tenderness; compassion,
he had no other consideration of money, than for the sup-
port of his lustre; and whilst he could do that, he cared not
for money; having no bowel; in the point of running in debt,
or borrowing all he could. clarendon.
5. this word seldom has a singular, except in writers of ana-
tonn v. -
b.o. n. s. [from bow or branch, or from the verb to bow or
bend.]
1. an arbour; a sheltered place covered with green trees, twined
and bent.
but, o sad virgin, that thy power
might raise musaeus from his bower. -
to gods appealing, when i reach their bow'r,
with loud complaints, they answer me in show’rs, i/.../er.
refresh'd, they wait them to the bow'r of state,
where, circl”d with his peers, atrides sat. pope.
2. it seems to signify, in spensor, a blow ; a stroke ; bourrer,
fr. to fall upon.
his rawbone arms, whose mighty brawned bowers
were wont to rive steel plates, and helmets hew,
were clean consum’d, and all his vital powers
decay’d. spenser's fairy queen.
bow er. n.s.. [from the bow of a ship.] anchors so called. see
bow.
to bow er. v. a. [from the noun..] to embower; to inclose.
thou didst bower the spirit,
in mortal paradise of such sweet flesh.
bow ery. adj. [from bower.] full of bowers.
landskips how gay the bow'ry grotto yields,
which thought creates, and lavish fancy builds. 7 coll.
snatch'd through the verdant maze the hurried eye
distracted wanders: now the bow'ry walk
of covert close, where scarce a speck of day
falls on the lengthen’d gloom, protracted sweeps. thomson.
to bow ge. see to bouc e.
bowl. n.s.. [buzlin, welch; which signifies, according to
junius, any thing made of horn, as drinking cups anciently
were. it is pronounced b.le.]
1. a vessel to hold liquids, rather wide than deep; distinguished
from a cup, which is rather deep than wide.
give me a bowl of wine;
i have not that alacrity of spirit,
nor cheer of mind, that i was wont to have. shakeso.
if a piece of bron be fastened on the side of a bowl of water,
milton.
shogsheare.
a loadstone, in a boat of cork, will make unto it. brown.
the sacred priests, with ready knives, bereave
the beasts of life, and in full bowls receive
the streaming blood. drydon.
while the bright sein, t’ exalt the soul,
with sparkling plenty crowns the bowl,
and wit and social mirth inspires. fenton to lord gower.
2. the hollow part of any thing.
if you are allowed a large silver spoon for the kitchen, let
half the bowl of it be worn out with continual scraping. swift.
3. a basin, or fountain.
but the main matter is so to convey the water, as it never
stay either in the bowl or in the cistern. bacon.
bowl. m. s. [boule, fr. it is pronounced as cow, howl.] a
round-mass, which may be rolled along the ground.
like to a bowl upon a subtile ground,
i’ve tumbi’d past the throw.
how finely dost thou times and seasons spin
and make a twist checker'd with night and day !
which as it lengthens, winds, and winds us in,
as bowls go on, but turning all the way. herbert.
like him, who would lodge a bowl upon a precipice, either
my praise falls back, or stays not on the top, but rowls over.
- dryden.
men may make a game at bowls in the summer, and a game
at whisk in the winter. dennis's letters.
though that piece of wood, which is now a bowl, may be
made square, yet, if roundness be taken away, it is no longer a
bowl. j/atts's logick.
shakespeare.
is a
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 289</div><p class="text">b o x
b r a
r
lit.
o
co
#:
o:
so
so
rig:
solo
o o *
e o'w lin g.
to bowl. v. a. [from the noun.]
i. to roll as a bowl.
2. to pelt with any thing rolled.
alas! i had rather be set quick i' th' earth, -
and bow'd to death with turnips. merry wives of hondor.
bo' wilde r-stones. n.s. lumps or fragments of stones or mar-
ble, broke from the adjacent cliffs, rounded by being tumbled
to and again by the water ; whence their name. hoodward.
bo'wler. m. s. [from bowl.] he that plays at bowls.
howl i n.e. ! n.j. [sea term.] a rope fastened to the middle
part of the outside of a sail; it is fastencd in three
or four parts of the sail, called the bowling bridle. the use
of the bowling is to make the sails stand sharp or close to a
wind. harris.
bowling-green. m. s. [from bowl and green.] a level piece
-
of ground, kept smooth for bowlers.
a bowl equally poised, and thrown upon a plain bowling-
green, will run necessarily in a direct line. bently.
boow man. m. s. [from bow and man.] an archer; he that shoots
with a bow.
the whole city shall flee, for the noise of the horsemen and
bzwmen. jorem. iv. 29.
boows prit. n.s. (from the bow of the ship.] this word is
generally spelt be sprit ; which see.
72 bowsse n. v. a. [probably of the same original with bouse,
but found in no other passage.] to drench ; to soak.
the water fell into a close walled plot ; upon this wall was
the frantick person set, and from thence tumbled headlong in-
to the pond; where a strong fellow tossed him up and down,
until the patient, by foregoing his strength, had somewhat for-
got his fury: but if there appeared small amendment, he was
a w/ned again and again, while there remained in him any
hope of life, for recovery. carew's survey of cornwall.
bosw's tring. m. s. [from low and string.] the string by which
the bow is kept bent.
he hath twice or thrice cut cupid's bow/oring, and the little
hangman dare not shoot at him. shakespeare.
sound will be conveyed to the ear, by striking upon a bow-
firing, if the horn of the bow be held to the ear. bacon.
bo’wy er. m. s. [from bow.]
1. an archer; one that uses the bow.
call for vengeance from the bowyer king. dryden.
2. one whose trade is to make bows.
box. n.s.. [box, saxon; buxus, lat.] a tree.
- the leaves are pennated, and evergreen ; it hath male
flowers, that are produced at remote distances from the fruit,
on the same tree; the fruit is shaped like a porridge-pot, in-
verted, and is divided into three cells, containing two seeds
in each, which, when ripe, are cast forth by the elasticity of
the vessels. the wood is very useful for engravers, and ma-
thematical instrument-makers ; being so hard, close, and
ponderous, as to sink in water. miller.
box, there are two sorts of it; the dwarf box, and a taller
sort. the dwarf box is very good for borders, and is easily
kept in order, with one clipping in the year. it will increase
of slips set in march, or about bartholomew tide, and will
prosper on the declivity of cold, dry, barren, chalky hills,
where nothing else will grow. mortimer.
box. m. s. [box, sax. buffe, germ.]
1. a cafe made of wood, or other matter, to hold any thing. it
is distinguished from cheft, as the loss from the greater. it is
supposed to have its name from the box wood.
a magnet, though but in an ivory box, will, through the
box, send forth his embracing virtue to a beloved needle. sidney,
about his shelves
a beggarly account of empty boxes. shakespeare.
the lion’s head is to open a most wide voracious mouth,
which shall take in letters and papers. there will be under
it a box, of which the key will be kept in my custody, to re-
ceive such papers as are dropped into it. steele.
this casket india's glowing gems unlocks,
and all arabia breathes from yonder box. pope.
2. the case of the mariners compass.
3. the chest into which money given is put:
so many more, so every one was used,
that to give largely to the box refused. spensor.
4. the seats in the playhouse, where the ladies are placed.
'tis left to you, the boxes and the pit
are sovereign judges of this sort of wit. dryden.
she glares in balls, front boxes, and the ring,
a vain, unquiet, glittering, wretched thing. pope.
to box. v. a. [from the noun...] to inclose in a box.
box’d in a chair, the beau impatient fits,
while spouts run clatt'ring o'er the roof by fits. swift.
box. n.s.. [hock, a cheek, welch.] a blow on the head given
with the hand.
for the box o' th' ear that the prince gave you, he gave it
like a rude prince. shakespeare.
if one should take my hand perforce, and give another a box
on the ear with it, the law punisheth the other. bramhall.
there may happen concussions of the brain from a box on
o
olo
the ear. wiseman's surgery.
vol. i.
ophis, the fisherman, received a box on the ear from thes,
tylis. addison's spectator,
to box. v. n. [from the noun..] to fight with the fist.
the ass very fairly looked on, till they had boxed themselves
a-weary, and then left them fairly in the lurch. l'e/orange.
alcopard is like a cat; he boxes with his forefeet, as a cat
doth her kitlins. grew.
the fighting with a man's shadow consists in brandishing
two sticks, loaden with plugs, of lead; this gives a man all the
pleasure of boxing, without the blows. speciator.
he hath had six duels, and four and twenty boxing matches,
in defence of his majesty's title. - speciator.
to box. v. a. to strike with the fist.
box.e.n. m. s. [from box.]
1. made of box.
the young gentlemen learned, before all other things, to
design upon tablets of boxen wood. dylon.
as lads and lasses stood around,
to hear my boxen hautboy sound.
ga -
2. resembling box. y
her faded cheeks are chang'd to boxen hue,
and in her eyes the tears are ever new. dryden.
bo'xer. n.s.. [from box.] a man who fights with his fist.
boy. m. s. [bub, germ. the etymology is not agreed on.]
i. a male child; not a girl.
the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girl, playing.
zech.
2. one in the state of adolescence; older than an infant, yet not
arrived at puberty or manhood.
speak thou, boy;
perhaps thy childishness will move him more
than can our reasons. shakesp. curiolanur.
sometimes forgotten things, long cast behind,
rush forward in the brain, and come to mind:
the nurse's legends are for truths receiv'd, -
and the man dreams but what the boy believ'd. dryden.
3. a word of contempt for young men, as noting their imma-
turity.
men of worth and parts will noteasily admit the familiarity
of boys, who yet need the care of a tutor. locke.
the pale boy senator yet tingling stands,
and holds his breeches close with both his hands. pope.
to boy. v. n. [from the noun..] to treat as a boy.
anthony
shall be brought drunken forth, and i shall see
some squeaking cleopatra boy my greatness,
i' th' posture of a whore. shakespeare.
boy hood, n. s. [from boy..] the state of a boy; the part of
life in which we are boys. this is perhaps an arbitrary word.
if you should look at him, in his boyhood, through the maghi-
fying end of a perspective, and, in his manhood, through the
other, it would be imposible to spy any difference; the same
air, the same strut, swift.
boyish. adj. [from boy.] . \
i. belonging to a boy.
i ran it through, e'en from my boyish days,
to th’ very moment that he bade me tell it. shakespeare.
2. childish ; trifling:
this unhair'd sauciness, and boyish troops,
the king doth smile at, and is well prepard
to whip this dwarfish war, these pigmy arms. shakes.
young men take up some english poet for their model, and
imitate him, without knowing wherein he is defective, where
he is boyish and trifling. dryden.
bo yishly. adv. [from boyish.) childishly; triflingly.
bo yish ness. n.s.. [from boyish..] childishness; trifling man-
ner.
boy ism. m. s. [from boy..] puerility; childishness.
he had complained he was farther off, by being so near, and
a thousand such boyisms, which chaucer rejected as below the
subject. ! dryden.
bp. an abbreviation of bishop.
bra'bble. m. s. [bral belon, dutch..] a clamorous contest; a
squabble ; a broil.
here in the streets, desperate in shame and state,
in private brabble did we apprehend him. shakespeare.
to brabble. v. n. [from the noun..] to clamour; to con-
test noisily.
brabbler. m. s. [from brabble.] a clamorous, quarrelsome,
noisy fellow.
to brace. v. a. [embraser, fr.]
1. to bind; to tie close with bandages.
the women of china, by bracing and binding them from
their infancy, have very little feet. o locke,
2. to intend; to make tense; to strain up.
the tympanum is not capable of tension that way, in such
a manner as a drum is braced. - holder.
the diminution of the force of the pressure of the external
air, in bracing the fibres, must create a debility in muscular mo-
tion. arbuthnot on air.
brace. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. cinetuic ; bandage.
3 l. 2. that<br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">
|
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 290</div><p class="text">b r a
b r a
2. that which holds any thing tight.
the little bones of the car-drum do in straining and relaxing
it, as the braces of the war drum do in that. derham.
3. brace. [in architecture.] is a piece of timber framed in
with bevil joints, used to keep the building from swerving
either way. builder's dic.
4. br aces. [a sea term.] ropes belonging to all the yards,
except the mizen. they have a pendant to the yard-arm, two
braces to each yard ; and, at the end of the pendant, a block
is seized, through which the rope called the brace is reeved.
the braces serve to square and traverse the yards. sea dici.
5. braces of a coach. thick straps of leather on which it
hangs. -
6. harness.
7. brace. [in printing.] a crooked line inclosing a passage,
which ought to be taken together, and not separately ; as in
a triplet. -
charge venus to command her son,
wherever else she lets him rove,
to shun my house, and field, and o:
peace cannot dwell with hate or love. prior.
8. warlike preparation ; from bracing the armour; as we say,
girded for the battle. o -
as it more concerns the turk than rhodes,
so may he with more facile question bear it;
for that it stands not in such warlike brace,
but altogether lacks th’ abilities
that rhodes is dress'd in.
9. tension; tightness.
the most frequent cause of deafness is the laxness of the
tympanum, when it has lost its brace or tension. holder.
bracf. m. / [of uncertain etymology, probably derived from
two braced together.]
1. a pair ; a couple. it is not braces, but brace, in the plural.
down from a hill the beasts that reign in woods,
first hunter then, pursu’d a gentle brace, -
godliest of all the forest, hart and hind. paradise loft.
ten brace and more of greyhounds, snowy fair,
and tall as stags, ran loose, and cours'd around his chair.
dryden's fables.
2. it is used generally in conversation as a sportsman's word.
he is said, this summer, to have shot with his own hands
fifty brace of pheasants. addison.
3. it is applied to men in contempt. -
but you, my brace of lords, were i so minded,
i here could pluck his highness’ frown upon you.
bra cele t. n.s.. [bracelet, french.]
1. an ornament for the arms. -
both his hands were cut off, being known to have worn
bracelets of gold about his wrists. sir j. hayward.
tie about our tawny wrists
bracelets of the fairy twists. . ben. johnson.
a very ingenious lady used to wear, in rings and bracelets,
store of those gems. boyle.
2. a piece of defensive armour for the arm.
bra’ce r. m. s. [from brace.]
1. a cineture ; a bandage.
when they affect the belly, they may be restrained by a
bracer, without much trouble. j/seman.
2. a medicine of constringent power.
brach. n. s. [braque, fr. j a bitch hound.
truth 's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipped out,
when the lady brach may stand by the fire, and stink.
- shakespeare.
bra'chi al. adj. [from brachium, an arm, lat.] belonging
to the arm.
brachy graphy, n. s. [3:2%’s, short, and yopa, to write.]
the art or practice of writing in a short compass.
all the certainty of those high pretenders, bating what they
have of the first principles, and the word of god, may be cir-
cumscribed by as small a circle as the creed, when brachygraphy
had confined it within the compass of a penny. glanville.
bra ck. n.s.. [from break.] a breach; a broken part.
the place was but weak, and the bracks fair; but the de-
fendants, by resolution, supplied all the defe&amp;ts. hayward.
let them compare my work with what is taught in the
schools, and if they find in theirs many bracks and short ends,
which cannot be spun into an even piece, and, in mine; a fair
coherence throughout, i shall promise myself an acquie-
scence. digby.
bra'cket. n. s. [a term of carpentry.] a piece of wood fixed
for the support of something.
let your shelves be laid upon brackets, being about two feet
wide, and edged with a small lath. mortimer.
brackish. adj. [brack, dutch. j salt; somewhat salt: it is
used particularly of the water of the sea. -
pits upon the sea shore turn into fresh water, by percolation
of the salt through the sand; but it is farther noted, after a time,
shakspeare.
shakesp.
the water in such pits will become brackish again. bacon.
when i had gain'd the brow and top,
a lake of brackish waters on the ground,
was all i found. plerbert.
the wise contriver, on his end intent,
mix'd them with salt, and season’d all the s.a.
what other cause could this effect produce :
the brackish tineture through the main diffuse blackmore.
bra ckishness. n.s. [from trackish.] saltness in a small
degree. - -
all the artificial strainings, hitherto leave a lackjones, in
salt water, that makes it unfit for animal uses. cheyne.
brad, being an initial, signifies "road, spacious, from the sax-
on brab, and the gothick, braid. gibson.
brad. m. s. a sort of nail to floor rooms with. they are about
the size of a tenpenny nail, but have not their heads made with
a shoulder over their shank, as other nails, but are made pretty
thick towards the upper end, that the very top may be drives,
into, and buried in the board they nail down; so that the tops'
of these brado will not catch the thrums of the mops, when the
floor is washing. 44.xon.
to brag. v. n. [braggeren, dutch.]
i. to boast; to display ostentatiously; to tell boastful stories.
thou coward l art thou bragging to the stars 2
telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,
and wilt not come 2 shakespeare.
mark me, with what violence she first loved the moor, but
for bragging, and telling her fantastical lies. shakespeare.
in bragging out some of their private tenets, as if they were
the established doctrine of the church of england. sanderson.
the rebels were grown so strong there, that they intended
then, as they already bragged, to come over and make this
the seat of war. clarenaon.
mrs. bull's condition was looked upon as desperate by all
the men of art ; but there were those that bragged they had
an infallible ointment. arbuthnot.
2. it has of before the thing boasted.
knowledge being the only thing whereof we poor old men
can brag, we cannot make it known but by utterance. sidney.
verona brags of him,
to be a virtuous and well govern'd youth.
ev'ry busy little scribler now
swells with the praises which he gives himself,
and taking sanctuary in the crowd,
brags of his impudence, and scorns to mend.
3. on is used, but improperly.
yet lo! in me what authors have to brag on,
reduc’d at last to hiss in my own dragon.
brag. n.s.. [from the verb.]
i. a boast; a proud expression.
a kind of conquest
caesar made here; but made not here his brag
of came, and saw, and overcame. . shakespeare.
it was such a new thing for the spaniards to receive so lit-
tle hurt, upon dealing with the english, as avellaneda made
great brags of it, for no greater matter than the waiting upon
the english afar off. bacon-
2. the thing boasted.
beauty is nature's brag, and must be shewn *
in courts, at feasts, and high solemnities,
where most may wonder. milton-
braggado'cio. n. j. [from brag..] a puffing, swelling, boast-
ing fellow.
the world abounds in terrible fanfarons, in the masque of
men of honour; but these braggadocios are easy to be detected.
l’estrange.
by the plot, you may guess much of the characiers of the
persons; a braggadocio captain, a parasite, and a lady of plea-
sure. - dryden.
braggardism. n.s.. [from brag..] boastfulness ; vain often-
tation.
braggart. adj. [from brag..] boastful; vainly ostentatious.
shall i, none's slave, of high-born or rais'd men
fear frowns ; and my mistress, truth, betray thee
to th’ huffing, braggart, puft nobility ? donne.
braggart. n.s.. [from brag..] a boaster. - -
- who knows himself a braggart,
let him fear this; for it will come to pass,
that every braggart shall be found an ass. shakesp.
brag ger. m. s. [from brag..] a boaster ; an ostentatious
fellow. -
such as have had opportunity to sound these braggers tho-
roughly, by having sometimes endured the penance of their
sottish company, have found them, in converse, empty and
insipid. south.
bragless. adj. [from brag..] without a boast; without often-
tation.
the bruit is, hector's slain, and by achilles.—
if it is so, bragles; let it be,
great hector was as good a man as he. shakespeare.
bra'gly. adv. [from brag..] finely; so as it may be bragged.
seest not thiik hawthorn stud,
how bragsy it begins to bud,
and utter his tender head
flora now calleth forth each flower,
and bids make ready maia's bower.
shakespeare.
roscommon.
pope.
_*
s.pen for.
12
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 291</div><p class="text">b r a
b r a
as:
ku.
i.!ro
ss oft
of [.
dr.
in to
itaa.
o
i-
vo
o
o o,
: dio
too
no.
ho
-
so
so."
§: o,
‘72 braid. v. a. [braeban, saxon.] to weave together.
close the serpent sly,
infinuating, wove with gordian twine
his braided train, and of his fatal guile -
gave proof unheeded. milton.
osier wands, lying loosely, may each of them be easily
dissociated from the rest; but when braided into a basket,
they cohere strongly. boyle.
a ribband did the braided tresses bind,
the rest was loose, and wanton'd in the wind. dryden.
since in braided gold her foot is bound,
and along trailing manteau sweeps the ground,
her shoe disdains the street. gy.
braid. m.s.. [from the verb.] a texture; a knot, or compli-
cation of something woven together.
listen where thou art fitting,
under the glossy, cool, translucent wave,
in twisted braids of lilics knitting
the loose train of thy amber-dropping hair. milton.
no longer shall thy comely traces break
in flowing ringlets on thy snowy neck,
or sit behind thy head, an ample round, -
in graceful braids, with various ribbon bound. prior.
bra1d. adj. [to brede, in chaucer, is to deceive..] an old word,
which seems to fignify deceitful. -
since frenchmen are so braid,
marry 'em that will. i'll live and die a maid. shałos).
brails. n.s. [sea, term.] small ropes reeved through blocks,
which are seized on either side the ties, a little off upon the
yard; so that they some down before the sails of a ship, and
are fastened at the skirt of the sail to the crengles. their use is
when the sail is furled across, to hail up its bunt, that it may
the more readily be taken up or let fall. flarris.
brain. n.s.. [by a 3&amp;n, sax. breyne, dutch.] -
1. that colle&amp;tion of vessels and organs in the head, from which
sense and motion arise.
the brain is divided into cerebrum and cerebellum. cerebrum
is that part of the brain, which possesses all the upper and fore-
part of the cranium, being separated from the cerebellum by the
second process of the dura mater, under which the cerebellum
is situated. the substance of the brain is distinguished into
outer and inner; the former is called corticalis, cinerea, or glan-
dulosa; the latter, medullaris, alla, or nerved. chesolden.
if i be served such another trick, i'll have my brains ta'en
out, and buttered, and give them to a dog for a new year's
gift. shakespeare's merry wives of iłindsor.
that man proportionably hath the largest brain, i did, i
confess, somewhat doubt, and conceived it might have failed
in birds, especially such as having little bodies, have yet large
cranies, and seem to contain much brain, as snipes and wood-
cocks; but, upon trial, i find it very true. brown's pulg, err.
2. that part in which the understanding is placed ; therefore
taken for the understanding.
the force they are under is a real force, and that of their
fate but an imaginary conceived one ; the one but in their
brains, the other on their shoulders. hammond.
a man is first a geometrician in his brain, before he be such
in his hand. hale.
3. sometimes the affe&amp;tions: this is not common, nor proper.
my son edgar ! had he a hand to write this, a heart and
brain to breed it in shakespeare.
to brain. v. a. [from the noun..] to dash out the brains ;
to kill by beating out the brains.
why, as i told thee, ’tis a custom with him i' th' afternoon
to sleep; there thou may’st brain him. shakespeare.
- outlaws of nature,
-* fit to be shot and brain'd, without a process,
to stop infection; that's their proper death. dryden.
next seiz'd two wretches more, and headlong cast,
brain’d on the rock, his second dire repast. pope.
bra inish. adj. [from brain.] hotheaded; furious; as cere-
brosus in latin.
in his lawless fit,
behind the arras hearing something stir,
he whips his rapier out, and cries, a rat
and, in his brainish apprehension, kills
the unseen good old man. shakspeare.
bra'inless. adj. [from brain..] silly; thoughtless; witheis.
some brainless men have, by great travel and labour, brought
to pass, that the church is now ashamed of nothing more than
of saints. hooker.
if the dull brain's ajax come safe off, *
we'll dress him up in voices. shakespeare.
the brainless stripling, who, expell'd the town,
damn'd the stiff college, and pedantick gown,
aw'd by thy name, is dumb. tickell.
brain pan. n.s. [from brain and pan.] the skull containing
the brains. -
with those huge bellows in his hands, he blows
new fire into my head: my brainpan glows. dryden.
bra in sick. adj. [from brain and sick.] diseased in the under-
standing; addleheaded ; giddy ; thoughtless.
nor once deject the courage of our minds,
because caslonora's mad; her brains...} raptures
qannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel. shakespeare.
they were braio men, who could neither endufe the
government of their king, nor yet thankfully receive the au-
thours of their deliverance. kaoli, i.
bratssickly, adv. [from trains...}..] weakly; headily.
why, worthy thane,
you do unbend your noble strength to think
so brainsickly of things.
* - - - - shakes rare.
brainsick n ess. n.s. [from lrains:{..] indiscret
ion ; giddi-
ness. 2 to
}***t. m.s. among jewellers for a rough diamond. die?.
brake. the prete it of break.
he thought it sufficie..t to corre&amp; the multitude with sharp
words, and brake out into this cholerick speech. anzies.
brake... m. s. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. a thicket of bramules, or of thorns.
a dog of this town used daily to fetch meat, and to carry
the same unto a blind mastiff, that lay in a brake without the
to wn, - carew.
if i'm traduc’d by tongues, which neither know
my faculties nor person; let me say,
'tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
that virtue must go through. shakes care.
in every bush and brake, where hap may find
the serpent sleeping. milton.
full little thought of him the gentle knight,
who, flying death, had there conceal’d his flight;
in brakes and brambles hid, and shunning mortal fight.
dryden's falls.
2. it is said originally to mean fern.
brake. m. s.
1. an instrument for dressing hemp or flax.
2. the handle of a ship's pump.
3. a baker's kneading trough.
4. a sharp bit or snaffle for horses. - d},57.
a smith's brake is a machine in which horses unwilling to
be shod, are confined during that operation.
bra ky; adj. [from brake.] thorny; prickly; rough.
redeem arts from their rough and braky seats, where they
lie hid and overgrown with thorns, to a pure, open light, where
they may take the eye, and may be taken by the hand, b, j.
bramble, n.s. [enemlar, sax. rubus, lat.]
1. the blackberry bush; the raspberry bush, or hind-
berry. amiller.
2. it is taken, in popular language, for any rough prickly shrub.
- the bush my bed, the bramble was my bow'r,
the woods can witness many a woful store.
there is a man haunts the forest, that abuses our young
plants with carving rosalind on their barks; hangs odes upon
hawthorns, and elegies on brambles; all, forsooth, deifying
the name of rosalind. shakespeare.
content with food, which nature freely bred,
qn wildings and on strawberries they fed :
cornels and bramble berries gave the rest,
spensor.
and falling acorns furnish’d out a feast. dryden.
thy younglings, cuddy, are but just awake,
no thrustles shrill the bramble bush forsake. gay.
bra'mbling. m. s. a bird, called also a mountain chaffinch. dic.
bran. m. s. [bronna, ital.] the husks of corn ground; the
refuse of the sieve.
from me do back receive the flow'r of all, -
and leave me but the bran. shakspeare.
the citizens were driven to great distress for want of vic-
tuals; bread they made of the coarsest bran, moulded in cloaths; ,
for otherwise it would not cleave together. hayward.
in the fifting of fourteen years of power and favour, all
that came out, could not be pure meal, but must have, among
it, a certain mixture of padar and bran, in this lower age of
human fragility. j/otton.
then water him, and drinking what he can,
encourage him to thirst again with bran. dryden.
branch. n.s.. [branche, french.)
i. the shoot of a tree from one of the main boughs.
why grow the branches, when the root is gone *
why wither not the leaves that want their sap * shakesh.
2. any member or part of the whole; any distinct article; any
section or subdivision.
your oaths are past, and now subscribe your names,
that his own hand may strike his honour down,
that violates the smallest branch herein. shakespeare.
the belief of this was of special importance, to confirm our
hopes of another life, on which so many branches of christion
picty do immediately depend. hammond.
in the several branches of justice and charity, comprehended
in those general ruies, of loving our neighbour as ourselves,
and of doing to others as we would have them do to us, there
is nothing but what is most fit and reasonable. tillotson.
this precept will oblige us to perform our duty, according
to the nature of the various branches of it. rogers.
3. any part that shoots out from the rest. -
i - and
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 292</div><p class="text">b r a
and six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three
branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three
branches of the candlestick out of the other side. exodus.
his blood, which disperseth itself by the branches of veins,
may be resembled to waters carried by brooks. raleigh.
4. a smaller river running into, or proceeding from a larger.
if, from a main river, any branch be separated and divided,
then, where that branch doth first bound itself with new banks,
there is that part of the river where the branch forsaketh the
main stream, called the head of the river. raleigh.
5. any part of a family descending in a collateral line.
his father, a younger branch of the ancient stock planted in
somersetshire, took to wife the widow. carew.
6. the offspring; the descendant. /
great anthony spain's well-beseeming pride,
thou mighty branch of emperours and kings crashaw.
7. the antlers or shoots of a stag's horn.
8. the branches of a bridle are two pieces of bended iron, that
bear the bit-mouth, the chains, and the curb, in the interval
between the one and the other. farrier’s dic7.
9. [in architecture.] the arches of gothick vaults; which arches
transversing from one angle to another, diagonal wife, form a
cross between the other arches, which make the sides of the
fauare, cf which the arches are diagonals. barris.
to branch. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to spread in branches.
they were trained together in their childhoods, and there
rooted betwixt then such an affection, which cannot choose
but branch now. shakespeare.
the cause of scattering the boughs, is the hasty breaking
forth of the sap ; and therefore those trees rise not in a body
of any height, but branch near the ground. the cause of the
pyramis, is the keeping in of the sap, long before it branch,
and the spending of it, when it beginneth to branch, by equal
degrees. bacon.
plant it round with shade
of laurel, ever-green, and branching plain. milton.
straight as a line in beauteous order stood,
of oaks unthorn a venerable wood;
fresh was the grass beneath, and ev'ry tree
at distance planted, in a due degree,
their branching arms in air, with equal space,
stretch'd to their neighbours with a long embrace. dryden.
one sees her thighs transform’d, another views
her arms shot out, and branching into boughs. addison.
2. to spread into separate and distinct parts and subdivisions.
the alps at the one end, and the long range of appenines
that passes through the body of it, branch out, on all sides,
into several different divisions. addison.
if we would weigh, and keep in our minds, what it is we
are considering, that would best instruct us when we should,
or should not, branch into farther distinctions. locke.
3. to speak diffusively, or with the distinction of the parts of a
discourse. -
i have known a woman branch out into a long dissertation
upon the cdging of a petticoat. speciator.
4. to have horns shooting out into antlers.
the swift stag from under ground
bore up his branching head. milton.
to branch. v. a. -
1. to divide as into branches.
the spirit of things animate are all continued within them-
selves, and are branched into canals, as blood is ; and the spirits
have not only branches, but certain cells or seats, where the
principal spirits do reside. bacon.
2. to adorn with needlework, representing flowers and sprigs.
in robe of lily white she was array'd,
that from her shoulder to her heel down raught,
the train whereof loose far behind her stray'd,
branch'd with gold and pearl, most richly wrought. spens.
bra'nch er. m. s. [from branch. j
1. one that shoots out into branches.
if their child be not such a speedy spreader and brancher, like
the vine, yet he may yield, with a little longer expectation, as
useful and more sober fruit than the other. j/atton.
2. [branchier, fr. j in falconry, a young hawk.
i enlarge my discourse to the observation of the eires, the
brancher, and the two sorts of lentners. //alton.
branchin ess. m. s. [from loranchy.] fulness of branches.
branchless. adj. [from branch.]
1. without shoots or boughs.
2. without any valuable product; naked.
if i lose mine honour,
i lose myself; better i were not yours, -
than yours so branchless. shakespeare.
bra'nch y. adj. [from branch.] full of branches; spreading.
- trees on trees o'erthrown,
fall crackling round him, and the forests groan;
sudden full twenty on the plain are strow'd,
and lopp'd, and lighten’d of their branchy load. pope.
what carriage can bear away all the various, rude, and
unwieldy loppings of a branchy tree at once # j/atts.
o'
****
o -
w
b r a
brand, n. s. [branb, saxon.]
1. a stick lighted, or fit to be lighted in the fire.
have i caught thee :
he that parts us shall bring a brand from heav'n,
and fire us hence. shakes eare.
take it, she said, and when your needs require,
this little brand will serve to light your fire. dryden.
if, with double diligence they labour to retrieve the hours
they have lost, they shall be saved ; though this is a service of
great difficulty, and like a brand plucked out of the fire. rogers.
2. [brandar, runick.] a sword, in old language.
they looking back, all the eastern side beheld
of paradise, so late their happy seat
wav'd over by that flaming brand; the gate
with dreadful faces throng'd, and firy arms.
3. a thunderbolt.
the fire omnipotent prepares the brand,
by vulcan wrought, and arms his potent hand. granville.
4. a mark made by burning a criminal with a hot iron, to rocte
him as infamous; a stigma. - -
clerks convict should be burned in the hand, both because
they might taste of some corporal punishment, and that they
might carry a brand of infany. bacon.
the rules of good and evil are inverted, and a brand of
mis: *i.
infamy passes for a badge of honour. l'a/trange.
5. any note of infamy.
where did his wit on learning fix a brand,
and rail at arts he did not under stand 2 drydin.
to bran d. 9. a. [brandon, dutch..] to mark with a brand,
or note of infamy.
have i liv'd thus long a wife, a true one,
never yet branded with suspicion shałospeare.
the king was after branded, by perkin's proclamation, for
an execrable breaker of the rights of holy church. bacon.
brand not their actions with so foul a name;
pity, at least, what we are forc’d to blame. dryden.
ha! dare not for thy life, i charge thee, dare not
to brand the spotless virtue of my prince. rowe.
our punick faith
is infamous, and branded to a proverb. addison.
the spreader of the pardons answered him an easier way, by
branding him with heresy. atterbury.
brand goose. m. s. a kind of wild fowl, less than a common
goose, having its breast and wings of a dark colour. dief-
to brandis h. v. a. [from brand, a sword.]
1. to wave, or shake, or flourish, as a weapon.
brave macbeth,
disdaining fortune, with his brandish’d stecs,
like valour's minion, carved out his passage.
he said, and brandishing at once his blade,
with eager pace pursu'd the flaming shade, drydon.
let me march their leader, not their prince;
and, at the head of your renown'd cydonians,
brandish this sword.
2. to play with ; to flourish.
he, who shall employ all the force of his reason, only in
brandishing of syllogisms, will discover very little. locke-
bra'ndling. m. s. the name for a particular worm.
the dew-worm, which some also call the lob-worm, and
the brandling, are the chief. walton.
brandy. m. s. [contracted from brandewine, or burnt wine.]
a strong liquor distilled from wine.
if your master lodgeth at inns, every dram of brand, extra-
ordinary that you drink, raiseth his character. swift's footm.
bra'ndy-win e. the same with brandy.
it has been a common saying, a hair of the same dog; and
thought, that brandy-wine is a common relief to such. //iseman.
shakespeare-
smith.
bra'ngle, n. s. [uncertainly derived.] squabble ; wrangle;
litigious contest.
the payment of tythes is subject to many frauds, brangles,
and other difficulties, not only from papists and dissenters, but
even from those who profess themselves protestants. swift.
to bra'ngle. v. n. [from the noun..] to wrangle ; to
squabble.
when polite conversing shall be improved, company will be
no longer pestered with dull story-tellers, nor brangling dis-
puters. swift.
bra'nglement. n. s. [from brangle.] the same with brangle.
brank. m. s. buckwheat, or brane, is a grain very useful and
advantageous in dry barren lands. mortimer.
bra'nn.y. adj. [from bran.] having the appearance of bran.
it became serpiginous, and was, when i saw it, covered with
white branny scales. j/isman.
bra's ing. adj. [from bras...] made of bras. it is now less
properly written according to the pronu.iciation brazen.
bra's ier. m. s. [from brass.]
1. a manufacturer that works in brass.
there is a fellow somewhat near the door, he should be a
brasier by his face. shakespeare.
brasiers that turn and irons, pots, kettles, &amp;c. have their
lathe made different from the common turners lathe. a1.xon.
2. a pan to hold coals. [probably from entryer, fr.] i
i t
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 293</div><p class="text">it is thought they had no chimneys, but were warmed with
-&gt; r
is on brosiri. - arbuthnot.
to 1. n.s. an american wood, commonly supposed to have
#. } been thus denominated, because first brought from
razi l'
fil; though huet shews it had been known by that name,
o years before the discovery of that country; and the best
sort comes.
a good polish;
orious red. …
no n.f. [brar, sax, tro, welch.] -
1. a yellow metal, made by mixing copper with lapis calami-
"...i. it is used, in popular language, for any kind of me-
in which copper has a part;
from fernambuc. it is used by turners, and takes
but chiefly in dying, though it gives but a
chambers.
baft is made of copper and calaminaris. bacon.
mens evil manners live in brass, their virtues
we write in water. shakespeare.
let others mold the running mass
of metals, and inform the breathing bras. dryden.
2. impudence. -
possiness, n.s.. [from brassy..] an appearance like brass;
some quality of brass. -
bossy, adj. [from bras.]
1. partaking of brass. - -
the part in which they lie, is near black, with some sparks
of a brassy o in it. woodward.
. hard as brass.
2. ha losses,
enough to press a royal merchant down,
and pluck commiseration of his state
from brass bosoms, and rough hearts of flint. shakespeare.
3. impudent. -
erast, particip, adj. [from burs?..] burst; broken. obsolete.
there creature never past,
that back returned without heavenly grace,
but dreadful furies which their chains have braft,
and damned sprights sent forth to make ill men agast.
spenser.
brat. n.s.. [its etymology is uncertain; brace, in saxon, fig-
nifies a blanket; from which, perhaps, the modern significa-
tion may have come.]
i. a child, so called in contempt.
he leads them like a thing
made by some other deity than nature,
that shapes man better; and they follow him,
against us brats, with no less confidence,
than boys pursuing summer butterflies. shakspeare.
this brat is none of mine:
hence with it, and, together with the dam,
commit them to the fire. shakespeare.
the friends, that got the brats, were poison'd too;
in this sad case what could our vermin do roscommon.
jupiter summoned all the birds and beasts before him, with
their brats and little ones, to see which of them had the pret-
tiest children. l’estrange.
i shall live to see the invisible lady, to whom i was obliged,
and whom i never beheld, since she was a brat in hanging-
sleeves. swift.
i give command to kill or save,
can grant ten thousand pounds a-year,
and make a beggar's brat a peer. swift.
2. the progeny; the offspring.
the two late conspiracies were the brats and offspring of
two contrary factions. south.
brava'do, n.s. (from bravada, span.] a boast; a brag.
spain, to make good the bravado,
names it the invincible armado.
brave, adj. [brave, fr.]
i. courageous; daring; bold; generous; high spirited.
an egyptian soothsayer made antonius believe, that his ge-
nius, which otherways was brave and confident, was, in the
presence of octavius caesar, poor and cowardly. bacon.
from armed foes to bring a royal prize,
shows your brave heart victorious as your eyes.
* gallant; having a noble mien; lofty; graceful.
i'll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
and wear my dagger with a braver grace.
3. magnificent; grand.
rings put upon his fingers,
and brave attendants near him, when he wakes;
would not the beggar then forget himself? shakes care.
but whosoe'er it was nature design'd
first a brave place, and then as brave a mind. denham.
4. excellent; noble: it is an indeterminate word, used to ex-
.. the superabundance of any valuable quality in men or
ings. *
let not old age disgrace my high desire,
anonymous.
j/aller.
shakespeare.
o o heavenly foul, in human shape contain'd;
o qo wood inflam'd doth yield the brave/l fire,
o when younger doth in smoke his virtue spend. sidney.
!. lf there be iron-ore, and mills, iron is a brave commodity
o, where wood aboundeth. bacon.
of statesman has not this science, he must be subject to a
vol. i,
*—
braver man than himself, whose province it is to direo all his
actions to this end. digby.
brave., n. s. [brave, fr.]
i. a hector; a man daring beyond decency or discretion.
r - -
hot braves, like thee, may fight, but know not well
to manage this, the last great stake. dryden.
morat’s too insolent, too much a brave,
his courage to his envy is a slave. dryden,
2. a boast; a challenge; a defiance.
there end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace;
we grant thou canst outscold us. shakespeare.
to brave. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to defy ; to challenge; to set at defiance.
he upbraids iago, that he made him
brave me upon the watch. shałesheare.
my nobles leave me, and my state is brav'd,
ev’n at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers.
shakespeare.
the ills of love, not those of fate i fear;
these i can brave, but those i cannot bear. dryden.
like a rock unmov’d, a rock that braves
the raging tempest, and the rising waves. dryden.
2. to carry a boasting appearance of.
both particular persons and factions are apt enough to flat-
ter themselves, or, at least, to brave that which they believe
not. bacon.
bra've ly. adv. [from brave..] in a brave manner; courage-
ously ; gallantly; splendidly.
martin swart, with his germans, performed bravely.
bacon.
no fire, nor foe, nor fate, nor night,
the trojan hero did affright,
who bravely twice renew'd the fight. denham.
your valour bravely did th’ assault sustain,
and fill'd the motes and ditches with the slain. dryden.
bra v ery. n.s.. [from brave.]
1. courage; magnanimity; generosity; gallantry.
it denotes no great bravery of mind, to do that out of a
desire of fame, which we could not be prompted to by a ge-
nerous passion for the glory of him that made us. speciator.
juba, to all the bravery of a hero,
adds softest love, and more than female sweetness. addison.
2. splendour; magnificence.
where all the bravery that eye may see,
and all the happiness that heart desire,
is to be found. spenser.
3. show; ostentation.
let princes choose ministers more sensible of duty than of
rising, and such as love business rather upon conscience than
upon bravery. bacon.
4. bravado; boast.
never could man, with more unmanlike bravery, use his
tongue to her disgrace, which lately had sung sonnets of her
praises. sidney.
for a bravery upon this occasion of power, they crowned
their new king in the cathedral church of dublin. bacon.
there are those that make it a point of bravery, to bid de-
fiance to the oracles of divine revelation. l'eorarge.
bra'vo. m. s. [lravo, ital.] a man who murders for hire.
for boldness, like the bravo's and banditti, is seldom cmploy.
ed, but upon desperate services. government of the tongue.
no bravoes here profess the bloody trade,
nor is the church the murd’rer's refuge made. gay.
to braw l. v. n. [brouiller, or brauler, fr. j
1. to quarrel noisily and indecently.
she troubled was, alas ! that it might be,
with tedious brawlings of her parents dear.
here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
hath often still'd my brawling discontent. shakes care.
how now, sir john what, are you brawling here
does this become your place, your time, your business
shakespeare's henry iv.
their batt’ring cannon charged to the mouths,
till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl'd down
the flinty ribs of this contemptuous city. shakes care.
in council she gives licence to her tongue
loquacious, brawling, ever in the wrong. dryden.
leave all noisy contests, all immodest clamours, brawling
language, and especially all personal scandal and scurrility, to
sidney.
the meanest part of the vulgar world. watts.
2. to speak loud and indecently.
his divisions, as the times do brawl,
are in three heads; one pow'r against the french,
and one against glendower. shakes care.
3. to make a noise. this is little used.
as he lay along
under an oak, whose antique root peeps out -
upon the brook that brawl; along this wood. shakespeare.
brawl. n.s. [from the verb.] quarrel; noise; sourishty.
he findeth, that controverfies thereby are made but brawl: ;
and thereforewisheth, that, in some lawful assembly of churches,
all these strifes may be decided. *.
eyer
3 m<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 294</div><p class="text">b r a
b r. e.
never since that middle summer's spring
met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
but with thy brawl; thou hast disturb’d our sport.
that bonum is an animal, -
made good with stout polemick brawl. hudibras.
bra'wler. n. s. [from brawl.] a wrangler; a quarrelsome,
noisy fellow. -
an advocate may incur the censure of the court, for being a
brawler in court, on purpose to lengthen out the cause. ayliffo.
brawn. n.s. [of uncertain etymology.]
1. the fleshy or musculous part of the body.
the brawn of the arm must appear full, shadowed on one
side, then shew the wrist-bone thereof. peacham.
but most their looks on the black monarch bend,
his rising muscles and his brawn commend;
his double biting ax, and beamy spear,
shakesp.
each asking a gigantick force to rear. dryden.
2. the arm, so called from its being musculous.
i’ll hide my silver beard in a gold beaver,
shakesp.
and in my vantbrace put this wither'd brawn.
i had purpose
once more to hew thy target from thy brawn.
3. bulk; muscular strength.
the boist'rous hands are then of use, when i,
with this direeting head, those hands apply;
brawn without brain is thine.
4. the flesh of a boar. -
the best age for the boar is from two to five years, at which
time it is left to geld him, or sell him for 'rawn. mortimer.
5. a boar.
bra'ws er. m. s. [from brawn..] a boar killed for the table.
at christmas time be careful of your fame,
see the old tenant’s table be the same ;
then if you would send up the brawner head,
sweet rosemary and bays around it spread. king.
bra'w nin ess. n.s [from brawny.] strength; hardness.
this brawnings, and insensibility of mind, is the best armour
against the common evils and accidents of life. locke.
braw ny. adj. [from brawn..] musculous ; fleshy; bulky; of
great muscles and streng-h.
the brawny fool, who did his vigour boast,
shakesp.
dryden.
in that presuming confidence was lost. drydin.
the native energy
turns all into the substance of the tree,
starves and destroys the fruit, is only made
for brawny bulk, and for a barren shade. dryden.
to bray. v. a. [bnacan, sax. braier, fr.] to pound, or
grind small.
i’ll burst him; i will bray
his bones as in a mo, tar. chapman.
except you would bray christendom in a mortar, and mould
it into a new paste, there is no possibility of a holy war. bacon.
to bray. v. n. [broire, fr. barrio, lat.]
1. to make a noise as an ass.
laugh, and they
return it louder than an ass can bray. dryden.
'agad if he should hear the lion roar, he'd cudgel him into
an ass, and to his primitive braying. congreve.
2. to make an offensive, harsh or disagreeable noise.
what, shall our feast be kept with slaughter'd men :
shall braying trumpets, and loud churlish drums,
clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp : shakespeare.
arms on armour clashing, bray'd
horrible discord. milton.
bray. m. s. [from the verb.]
i. voice of an ass.
2. harsh sound.
boist’rous untun'd drums,
and harsh resounding trumpets dreadful bray. shakespeare.
bra'yer. n. s. [from bray.]
1. one that bray's like an ass.
hold cry’d the queen; a cat-call each shall win;
equal your merits, equal is your din
but that this well-disputed game may end,
sound forth my brayers / and the welkin rend. pope.
2. [with printers; from to bray, or beat..] an instrument to
temper the ink.
to braze. v. a. [from brass.]
1. to solder with brass.
if the nut be not to be cast in brass, but only hath a worm
brazed into it, this niceness is not so absolutely necessary, be-
cause that worm is first turned up, and bowed into the grooves
of the spindle, and you may try that before it is brazed in the
in lit. moxon.
2. to harden to impudence. -
i have so often blushed to acknowledge him, that now i am
braz'd to it. shakespeare's king lear.
if damned custom hath not braz'd it so,
that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
bra’zen. adj. [from brass...}
1. made of brass. it was anciently and properly written brasen.
get also a small pair of brazen compasses, and a fine ruler,
for taking the distance. peacham,
shakespeare.
a bough his brazen helmet did sustain;
his heavier arms lay scatter'd on the plain. dryden.
2. proceeding from brass: a poetical use.
trumpeters
with brazen din blast you the city's ear,
make mingle with your rattling tabourines. shakespeare.
3. impudent.
to bra'ze n. v. n. to be impudent; to bully.
when i reprimanded him for his tricks, he would talk saucily,
lye, and brazen it out, as if he had done nothing amiss.
arbuthnot.
bra’zen face. m. s. [from brazen and face.] an impudent
wench : in low language.
you do, if you suspect me in any dishonesty.—well said,
brazenface; hold it out. shakespeare.
bra’z en faced. adj. [from brazenface..] impudent; shameless.
what a brazenfaced varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest
me? is it two days ago, since i tript up thy heels, and beat
thee before the king shakespeare.
quick-witted, brazenfac'd, with fluent tongues,
patient of labours, and dissembling wrongs.
bra’z enn ess. m. s. [from brazen.]
i. appearing like brass.
2. impudence.
bra’zi e.r. m. s. see br as er.
the halfpence and farthings in england, if you should self
them to the brazier, you would not lose above a penny in a
dryden.
shilling. swift.
brf ac h. m. s. [from break; breche, fr.]
1. the act of breaking any thing.
this tempest
dashing the garment of this peace, aboded
the sudden breach on't. shaks eare.
2. the state of being broken.
o you kind gods !
cure this great breach in his abused nature. shakespeare.
3. a gap in a fortification made by a battery.
the wall was blown up in two places; by which breach the
turks secking to have entered, made bloody fight. ano.2s.
tii mad with rage upon the breach he fir’d,
slew friends and foes, and in the smoke retir’d. dryden.
4. the violation of a law or contract.
that oath would sure contain them greatly, or the breach of
it bring them to shorter vengeance. spenser.
what are those breaches of the law of nature and nations,
which do forfeit all right in a nation to govern ? bacon.
a reach of duty towards our neighbours, still involves in it a
breach of duty towards god. south.
the laws of the gospel are the only standing rules of mora-
lity; and the penalties affixed by god to the breach of those
laws, the only guards that can effectually restrain men within
the true bounds of decency and virtue. rogers.
5. the opening in a coast.
but th' heedful boatman strongly forth did stretch
his brawny arms, and all his body strain,
that th' utmost sandy breach they shortly fetch,
while the dread danger does behind remain. sponsor.
6. difference ; quarrel; separation of kindness.
it would have been long before the jealousies and breaches
between the armies, would have been composed. clarenden.
7. infraction; injury.
this breach upon kingly power was without precedent. clar.
bread. m. s. [trieco, saxon.]
i. food made of ground corn.
mankind have found the means to make grain into bread,
the lightest and properest aliment for human bodies. arbuthnot.
bread, that decaying man with strength supplies,
and gen’rous wine, which thoughtful sorrow flies. pope.
2. food in general, such as nature requires: to get bread, im-
plies, to get sufficient for support without luxury.
in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread. geness.
if pretenders were not supported by the simplicity of the in-
quisitive fools, the trade would not find them bread. l'esir.
this dowager on whom my tale i found,
a simple sober life in patience led,
and had but just enough to buy her bread. dryden.
when i submit to such indignities,
make me a citizen, a senator of rome;
to sell my country, with my voice, for bread. philips.
i neither have been bred a scholar, a soldier, nor to any
kind of business; this creates uneasiness in my mind, fearing i
shall in time want bread. speciator.
3. support of life at large.
god is pleased to try our patience by the ingratitude of those
who, having eaten of our bread, have lift up themselves against
us. king charles.
but sometimes virtue starves, while vice is fed;
what then f is the reward of virtue bread 2 pope.
bread-chipper. m. s. [from bread and ship.] one that chips
bread; a baker's servant; an under butler.
no abuse, ha!, on my honour; no abuse. not to dis-
praise me, and call me pantler, and bread-chipper, and i know
not what? shakespeare.
bread-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 295</div><p class="text">b r e
b r e
mo,
dro
vesin.
&amp;:
of no
of th
m wit
so
n: s [from lread and corn.] corn of which bread
brea p-cor n.
is made.
there was not one drop of beer in the town; the bread,
d broad-corn, sufficed not for six days. - hayward.
*"on it is ripe, they gather it, and, bruising it among
broad-corn, they put it up into a vessel, and keep it as o for
37?rea
their slaves. in a ship.] a part of the hold ero b
soft rest, o the bread and bisket for i.
a bulk"
mell : o [from brab, broad, saxon.] the measure of
bo. superficies from side to side.
". is in ticinum, a church, that hath windows only
from above: it is in length an hundred feet, in breadth twenty,
o in height near fifty; having a door in the midst. bacon.
*. river ganges, according unto jater relations, if not in
in breadth and depth, may excell it. brown.
ko approach the slain o vast surprize, *
admire on what a breadth of earth he lies. jdryden.
i. gothick cathedrals, the narrowness of the arch makes
it is in height; the lowness opens it in breadth. aoison.
q, boak. v. a. pset. i looke, or brake; part. pasi broke, or
broken, [breccan, saxon.]
t by violence.
i. "... so. the five loaves among five thousand, how
many baskets of fragments took ye up a sark.
lotus tra; their bands asunder, and cast away their cords
from u.s. psalms.
a bruised reed shall he not break. ajaiah.
see, said the fire, how soon 'tis done ;
the hicks he then broke one by one :
so frong you'll be in friendship ty’d ;
so quickly broke, if you divide. swift.
2. to burst, or open by force.
o could we treak our way by force. milton.
moses tells us, that the fountains of the earth were broke
open, or clove asunder. o burnet s 1%eory.
into my hand he forc'd the tempting gold,
while 1 with modest struggling broke his hold. gay.
3. topierce; to divide, as light divides darkness.
by a dim winking lamp, which feebly broke *
the gloomy vapour, he lay stretch'd along. dryden.
4. to destroy by violence. -
this is the fabrick, which, when god breaketh down, none
can build up again. burnet's theory.
5. to batter; to make breaches or gaps in.
i'd give bay curtal, and his furniture,
my mouth no more were broken than these boys,
and wit as little beard. shakespeare.
6. to crush or destroy the strength of the body.
o father abbot!
an old man, broken with the storms of state,
js come to lay his weary bones among ye;
give him a little earth for charity.
the breaking of that parliament
broke him; as that dishonest victory
at chaeronea, fatal to liberty,
kill'd with report that old man eloquent. milton.
have not some of his vices weaken'd his body, and broke his
health? have not others dissipated his estate, and reduced him
to want? tillots,n.
7. to sink or appal the spirit. -
the defeat of that day was much greater than it then ap-
peared to be; and it even broke the heart of his army. clarendon.
i’ll brave her to her face;
i'll give my anger its free course against her :
thou shalt see, phoenix, how i’ll break her pride. philips.
8. to crush; to shatter.
your hopes without are vanish’d into sinoke ;
your captains taken, and your armies broke. dryden.
9. to weaken mental faculties.
opprest nature sleeps:
this rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
which, if conveniency will not allow,
stand in hard cure. shakespeare.
if any dabbler in poetry dares venture upon the experiment,
he will only break his brains. felton.
10, totame; to train to obedience; to enure to docility.
what boots it to break a colt, and to let him straight run
loose at random spenser.
why, then, thou can's not break her to the lute.—
—why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me. shakesp.
so fed before he's broke, he’ll bear
too great a stomach patiently to feel
-
shakes care.
the lashing whip, of chew the curbing steel. may.
that hot-mouth'd beast that bears against the curb,
hard to be broken even by lawful kings. - dryden.
no sports but what belong to war they know,
o: to break the stubborn colt, to bend the bow. dryden.
** virtues like these, -
o make human nature shine, reform the soul, -
so and break our fierce barbarians into men. addison.
o
*— -
13. to crack or open the skin, so as that the blood comes
18. to intercept.
29. to break ground. to open trenches.
2.
...behold young juba, the numidian prince,
with how much care he forms himself to glory,
and breaks the fierceness of his native temper. adason,
11. to make bankrupt.
the king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man. shao,
for this few know themselves: for merchants broke, ./
view their estate with discontent and pain. davies.
with arts like these, rich matho, when he speaks,
attracts all fees, and little lawyers breaks. dryden.
a command or call to be liberal, all of a sudden impoverishes
the rich, breaks the merchant, and shuts up every private
man's exchequer.
south
i2. to discard; to dismiss. 21/?so
i see a great officer broken. swift.
she could have run and waddled all about, even the day
before she broke her brow; and then my husband took up the
child. - shakespeare,
weak soul and blindly to destruction led:
she break her heart! she'll sooner break your head. dryden.
14. to make a swelling or imposthume open.
i5. to violate a contract or promise.
love's treak not hours,
unless it be to come before their time. shakespeare.
pardon this fault, 2nd, by my soul i swear,
i never more will break an oath with thee. shakespeare.
did not our worthies of the house, -
before they broke the peace, break vows : hudibras,
16. "i o infringe a law.
unhappy man to break the pious laws
of nature, pleading in his childrens cause. drydon,
17. to stop 5 to make cease.
break their talk, mistress quickly; my kinsman shall speak
for himself. shakespeare.
spirit of wide, mingled with common water, yet so as if the
first fall be by on, by means of a sop, or otherwise, it stayeth
above. bacon.
think not my sense of virtue is so small; -
i’ll rather leap down firs”, and break your fall. dryd.n.
as one condemn'd to leap a precipice,
who sees before his eyes the depth below,
tops short, and looks about for some kind shrub,
to reak his dreadful fall. dryden.
she held my hand, the destin’d blow to break,
then from her rosy lips began to speak. dryden.
19. to interrupt.
some folitary cloister will i choose,
coarse my attire, and short shall be my sleep,
broke by the melancholy midnight beli. dryden.
the father was so moved, that he could only command his
voice, broke with fighs and sobbings, so far as to bid her pro-
ceed. 4.dison.
the poor shadeshiv'ring stands, and must not break
his painful filence, till the mortal speak. tickel.
sometimes in broken words he figh’d his care,
look'd pale, and trembled when he view'd the sair. goy.
20. to separate company.
did not paul and barnabas dispute with that vehemence,
that they were forced to break company atterbury.
w
21. to dissolve any union.
it is great folly, as well as injustice, to break off so noble a
relation. collier.
22. to reform : with of.
the french were not quite broken of it, until some time after
they became christians. grew.
23. to open something new ; to propound something by an
overture; as if a seal were opened.
when any new thing shall be propounded, no counsellor
should suddenly deliver any positive opinion, but only hear it,
and, at the most, but to break it, at first, that it may be the
better understood at the next meeting. v bacon.
i, who much desir'd to know
of whence she was, yet fearful how to break
my mind, adventur'd humbly thus to speak. dryden.
24. to break the back. to strain or dislocate the vertebrae with
too heavy burdens.
i'd rather crack my finews, break my back,
than you should such dishonour undergo. shakespeare.
25. to break the back. to disable one's fortune.
o, many,
- - - *
have broke their backs, with laying manors on 'em,
for this great journey. shakespeare.
26. to break a deer. to cut it up at table.
27. to breakfast. to eat the first time in the day.
28. to break ground. to plow.
when the price of corn falleth, men generally give over
surplus tillage, and break no more ground than will serve to sup-
ply their own turn. . . carew.
the husbandman must first break the land, before it be made
capable of good seed. bavies.
30. to<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns="">

#9.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 296</div><p class="text">b r e
to break the heart. to destroy with grief.
good my lord, enter here.
—will't break my heart o
i’d rather break mine own. -
should not all relations bear a part?
it were enough to break a single heart. -
to loreak a jost. to utter a jest unexpected.
to break the neck. to lux, or put out the neck joints.
i had as lief thou didst break his neck, as his fingers. shakoff.
33. to break off. to put a sudden stop 5 to interrupt. . .
34. to break off. to preclude by some obstacle suddenly inter-
osed.
p to check the starts and sallies of the soul,
30.
shakoffeare.
dryden.
3i.
32.
and break off all its commerce with the tongue. addison.
35. to break up. to dissolve ; to put a sudden end to.
who cannot rest till he good fellows find ;
he breaks up house, turns out of doors his mind. herbert.
he threatened, that the tradesmen would beat out his teeth,
if he did not retire, and break up the meeting. arbuthnot.
36. to break up. to open; to lay open.
shells being lodged amongst mineral matter, when this
comes to be broke up, it exhibits impressions of the shells. j7%adw.
37. to break up. to separate or disband.
after taking the strong city of belgrade, solyman returning
to constantinople, broke up his army, and there lay still the
whole year following. knolles.
38. to break upon the wheel. to punish by stretching a criminal
upon the wheel, and breaking his bones with bats.
39. to break wind. to give vent to wind in the body.
to break. v. n.
1. to part in two.
give sorrow words, the grief that does not speak,
whispers the o'crfraught heart, and bids it break. shakesp.
2. to burst.
the clouds are still above; and, while i speak,
a second deluge o'er our heads may break. dryden.
the roman camp
hangs o'er us black and threatning, like a storm
just breaking on our heads. dryden.
3. to spread by dashing, as waves on a rock.
at last a falling billow stops his breath,
breaks o'er his head, and whelms him underneath. dryden.
he could compare the confusion of a multitude to that tu-
mult in the icarian sea, dashing and breaking among its crowd
of islands. pope.
4. to break as a swelling; to open, and discharge matter.
some hidden abscess in the mesentery, breaking some few
days after, was discovered to be an aposteme. harvey.
ask one who hath subdued his natural rage, how he likes the
change, and undoubtedly he will tell you, that it is no less
happy than the ease of a broken impostume, as the painful
gathering and filling of it. decay of piety.
5. to open as the morning. -
the day breaks not, it is my heart,
because that i and you must part.
stay, or else my joys will die,
and perish in their infancy. donne.
when a man thinks of any thing in the darkness of the
night, whatever deep impressions it may make in his mind,
they are apt to vanish as the day breaks about him. addison.
6. to burst forth; to exclaim.
- every man,
after the hideous storm that follow'd, was
a thing inspir’d ; and, not consulting, broke
into a general prophecy. shakosheare.
7. to become bankrupt.
i did mean, indeed, to pay you with this ; which, if, like
an ill venture, it come unluckily home, i break, and you, my
gentle creditors, lose. shakespeare.
he that puts all upon adventures, doth oftentimes treak, and
come to poverty. bacon.
cutler saw tenants break, and houses fall,
for very want he could not build a wall. pope.
8. to decline in health and strength.
yet thus, methinks, i hear them speak;
see how the dean begins to break:
poor gentleman' he droops apace. swift.
9. to issue out with vehemence.
whose wounds, yet fresh, with bloody hands he strook,
while from his breast the dreadful accents broke.
10. to make way with some kind of suddenness, impetuosity,
or violence.
calamities may be nearest at hand, and readiest to break in
suddenly upon us, which we, in regard of times or circum-
stances, may imagine to be farthest off. hooker.
the three mighty men broke through the host of the philis-
times. 2 samuel.
they came into judah, and brake into it. 2 chronicles,
or who shut up the sea within doors, when it brake forth,
as if it had issued out of the womb job.
this, this is he ; softly awhile,
let us not break in upon him. milton.
pope.
he resolved, that balfour should use his utmost endeavour
to break through with his whole body of horse. clarendzo.
when the channel of a river is overcharged with water,
more than it can deliver, it necessarily breaks over the banks,
to make itself room. hale.
sometimes his anger breaks through all disguises,
and spares not gods nor men. denham.
till through those clouds the sun of knowledge brake,
and europe from her lethargy did wake. denhan.
o! could'st thou break through fate's severe decree,
a new marcellus should arise in thee. dryden.
at length i've acted my severest part;
i feel the woman breaking in upon me,
and melt about my heart, my tears will flow. addison.
how does the lustre of our father's actions,
through the dark cloud of ills that cover him,
break out, and burn with more triumphant blaze
addison.
and yet, methinks, a beam of light break; in
on my departing soul. addison.
there are some, who, struck with the usefulness of these
charities, break through all the difficulties and obstructions
that now lie in the way towards advancing them. afterbury.
almighty pow'r, by whose most wise command,
helpless, forlorn, uncertain here i stand ;
take this faint glimmering of thyself away,
or break into my soul with perfect day ! arbuthnot.
see heav'n its sparkling portals wide display,
and break upon thee in a flood of day ! pope.
i must pay her the last duty of friendship, wherever she is,
though i break through the whole plan of life which i have
formed in my mind. swift.
11. to come to an explanation.
but perceiving this great alteration in his friend, he thought
fit to break with him thereof. sidney-
stay with me a while ;
i am to break with thee of some affairs,
that touch me near. shakespeare.
break with them, gentle love,
about the drawing as many of their husbands
into the plot, as can.
12. to fall out; to be friends no longer.
be not afraid to break
with murd’rers, and traitors, for the saving
a life so near and necessary to you,
as is your country's. ben. johnson.
to break upon the score of danger or expence, is to be mean
ben. johnson.
and narrow-spirited. collier.
sighing, he says, we must certainly break,
and my cruel unkindness compels him to speak. ae’rior.
13. to break from. to go away with some vehemence.
how didst thou scorn life's meaner charms,
thou who could'st break from laura's arms roscommon.
thus radiant from the circling croud he broke;
and thus with manly modesty he spoke. dryden.
this custom makes bigots and scepticks; and those that
break from it, are in danger of heresy. locłe.
14. to break in. to enter unexpectedly, without proper pre-
paration.
the doctor is a pedant, that, with a deep voice, and a ma-
gisterial air, breaks in upon conversation, and drives down all
before him. addison.
15. to break loose. to escape from captivity.
who would not, finding way, break loose from hell,
and boldly venture to whatever place,
farthest from pain
16. to break loose. to shake off restraint.
if we deal falsely in covenant with god, and break loose from
all our engagements to him, we release god from all the pro-
mises he has made to us. tillotson.
17. to break off. to desist suddenly.
do not peremptorily break off, in any business, in a fit of
anger; but howsoever you shew bitterness, do not act any
thing that is not revocable. bacon.
pius quintus, at the very time when that memorable vic-
tory was won by the christians at lepanto, being then hearing
of causes in consistory, broke off suddenly, and said to those
about him, it is now more time we should give thanks to
god. bacon.
when you begin to confider, whether you may safely take
one draught more, let that be accounted a sign late enough to
break off. , taylor.
18. to break off from. to part from with violence.
i must from this enchanting queen break off. shakespeare.
19. to break out. to discover itself in sudden effects.
let not one spark of filthy lustful fire
break out, that may her sacred peace molest. spensor.
they smother and keep down the flame of the mischief, so
as it may not break out in their time of goverment; what
comes afterwards, they care not. spensor.
such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour, that
ballad-makers cannot be able to express it. shakespeare.
milt277.
7 as
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 297</div><p class="text">b r e
p. r. e.
dio
| al to:
7.
§, to
so, to
to
: th:1:
is to
is: so
#:
o #2
hoto
i.
it,
so
#.
*
it mo'
o
times!"
yo
his o o
yo
" ;
as fire breaks out of flint by percussion, so wisdom and truth
iflueth out by the agitation of argument. howel.
fully ripe, his swelling fate breaks oot, - -
and hurries him to mighty mischiefs on. drydon.
all turn'd their fides, and to each other spoke;
i saw their words break out in fire and smoke. dryden.
like a ball of fire, the further thrown,
still with a greater blaze she shone,
and her bright soul broke out on ev'ry side.
there can be no greater labour, than to be always disem-
bling; there being so many ways by which a smothered truth
is apt to blaze, and break out. - south.
they are men of concealed fire, that doth not break out in
the ordinary circumstances of life. daison.
a violent fever broke out in the place, which swept away
great multitudes: addison.
20. to break out. to have eruptions from the body, as pustules
or sores.
21. to break cut. to become dissolute.
he broke not out into his great excesses, while he was re-
{trained by the councils and authority of seneca. dryden.
22. to break top. to cease; to intermit.
it is credibly affirmed, that, upon that very day, when the
river first riseth, great plagues in cairo use suddenly to break
up. - - bacon's natural history.
23. to break up. to dissolve itself. .
these, and the like conceits, when men have cleared their
understanding, by the light of cxperience, will scatter and break
zup, like mist. - bacort.
the speedy depredation of air upon watery moisture, and
version of the same into air, appeareth in nothing more visi-
ble than the sudden discharge or vanishing of a little cloud of
breath, or vapour, from glass, or any polished body; for the
mistiness scattereth, and breaketh up suddenly. bacon.
but, ere he came near it, the pillar and cross of light brake
zip, and cast itself abroad, as it were, into a firmament of many
stars. bacan.
what we obtain by conversation, is ostentimes lost again,
as soon as the company breaks top, or, at least, when the day
vanishes. //atts.
24. to break up. to begin holidays; to be dismissed from bu-
siness. - -
our army is dispers'd already :
like youthful fleets unyok'd, they took their course
east, west, north, south : or, like a school broke to ,
each hurries tow'rds his home and sporting-place. shakoff.
25. to break with. to part friendship with any.
there is a slave whom we have put in prison,
reports, the volscians, with two several powers,
are entered in the roman territories.—
—go see this rumourer whipt. it cannot be,
the volscians dare break with us. shakes care.
can there be any thing of friendship in snares, hooks, and
trapans? whosocver breaks with his friend upon such terms,
has enough to warrant him in so doing, both before god and
in all. south.
. . . invent some apt pretence,
to break with bertran. dryden.
26. it is to be observed of this extensive and perplexed verb, that
in all its significations, whether active or neutral, it has some
reference to its primitive meaning, by implying either detri-
ment, suddenness, violence, or separation. it is used often
with additional particles, up, out, im, off, forth, to modify
its signification.
break, n.s.. [from the verb.]
1. state of being broken ; opening. -
from the break of day until noon, the roaring of the can-
non never ceased. knolles.
for now, and since first break of day, the fiend,
mere serpent in appearance, forth was come. milton.
they must be drawn from far, and without breaks, to avoid
the multiplicity of lines. dryden.
the fight of it would be quite lost, did it not sometimes dis-
cover itself through the breaks and openings of the woods that
grow about it. addison.
2. a pause; an interruption.
3. a line drawn, noting that the sense is suspended.
all modern trash is -
set forth with num’rous breaks and dashes. swift.
bre'aker. m. s. [from break.j
1. he that breaks any thing.
cardinal, i'll be no bren or of the law: shakspeare.
if the churches were not employed to be places to hear
god’s law, there would be need of them, to be prisons for
the breakers of the laws of men. south.
2. a wave broken by rocks or sandbanks: a term of navigation.
t, break fast. v. n. [from break and fash.j. to eat the first
meal in the day. -
as soon as phoebus's rays inspc&amp; us;
first, sir, i read, and then i breafty!. prizł.
brf'akfast. m. s. (from the verb.]
1. the first meal in the day.
wol. i. - -
the duke was at breafy?, the last of his repas's in th:3
world. j%tion.
2. the thing eaten at the first meal. -
hope is a good breakfast, but it is a bad supper. bacon.
a good piece of bread would be often the best breakfast for
, my young master. locke.
3. a meal, or food in general. -
had i been seized by a hungry lion,
i would have been a breakfast to the beast. shakespeare.
i lay me down to gasp my latest breath,
the wolves will get a breakfast by my death, -
yet scarce enough their hunger to supply. drydon.
breakn eck. m. s. [from break and neck.j a fall in which the
neck is broken; a steep place endangering the neck.
- i must
forsake the court; to do.'t or no, is certain
to me a breakneck. - shakespeare.
bre'akprom is e. m. s. [from break and proms?..] one that
makes a practice of breaking his promiie.
i will think you the most athcistical breakpromise, and the
most hollow lover. soak speare.
br e. ak vow. m. s. [from break and cow.] he that practiseth the
breach of vows.
that daily break vow, he that wins of all, - -
of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids. shak.
bream. m. s. [brame, fr. cyprints latus. j the name of a fish.
the bream being at full growth, is a large fish; he will breed
both in rivers and ponds, but loves best to live in ponds. he
is, by gosner, taken to be more elegant than wholes me. he is
long in growing, but breeds exceedingly in a water that pleases
him, and in many ponds, so fast as to overstock them, and
starve the other fish. he is very broad, with a forked tail, and
his scales set in excellent order. he hath large eyes, and a nar-
row sucking mouth, two sets of teeth, and a lozing bone, to help
his grinders. the male is observed to have two large melts, and
the female two large bags of eggs or spawn. if alton’s angler.
a broad bream, to please some curious taste,
while yet alive in boiling water cast,
vex'd with unwonted heat, boils, flings about. ii aller.
breast, n.s.. [bjeore, saxon.]
1. the middle part of the human body, between the neck and
the belly.
no, traytress, angry love replies,
she's hid somewhere about thy breaft,
a place nor god norman denies,
for venus’ dove the proper nest. - - prizr.
2. the dugs or teats of women which contain the milk.
they pluck the fatherless from the breaft. job, xxiv. 9.
3. breast was anciently taken for the power of singing.
the better treaft,
the lesser rest. * * * * tuser of singing boys.
4. the part of a breast that is under the neck, between the fore-
legs. -
5. the disposition of the mind.
. i not by wants, or fears, or age opprest,
stem the wild torrent with a dauntless breas?. dryden.
6. the heart; the conscience.
needless was written law, where none opprest; -
the law of man was written in his brey'. dryden's quid.
7. the seat of the passions.
margarita first possess'd,
if i remember well, my breaft. - cowley.
each in his breas: the secret sorrow kept,
and thought it safe to laugh, though caesar wept. rowe.
7% breast. v. a. [from the noun..] to meet in front; to op-
pose breast to breast. -
- the threaden sails
draw the huge bottoms through the furrow’d sea,
breasing the lofty surge. shakespeare's henry v.
the hardy swiss
breas's the keen air, and carols as he goes. goldsmith.
bre'ast bone. m. s. [from breast and bone..] the bone of the
breast; the sternum. *
the belly shall be eminent by shadowing the flank, and un-
der the breastbone. peacham.
bre'ast casket. n.s.. [from breas, and caset.] with mariners.
the largest and longest caskets, which are a sort of strings
placed in the middle of the yard. -
bre'ast fast. m. s. [from breas; and fast. in a ship.] a rope
fastened to some part of her forward on, to hold her head to a
warp, or the like. - 11arris.
bre'ast high. adj. [from breas? and high..] up to the breast.
the river itself gave way unto her, so that she was straight
breas high,
lay madam partlet basking in the sun,
, brea/i̇high in sand. - dryden's fables.
brea'sthooks. n. s. [from breas and hook.] with shipwrights.
the compassing timbers before, that help to strengthen the
stem, and all the forepart of the ship. 11arris.
bre'ast knot. n.s.. [from breas? and anct.] a knot or bunch
of ribbands worn by women on the breast.
our ladies have still faces, and our men hearts, why may we
3 n not
sidney.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 298</div><p class="text">b r e
b r e
not hope for the same atchievements from the influence of this
breas/knot. addison's freeholder.
bre'ast plate. m. s. [from breas and plate.] armour for the
breast.
what stronger breas plate than a heart untainted
thrice is he arm’d, that hath his quarrel just. shakspeare.
'gainst shield, helm, brea/plate, and, instead of those,
five sharp smooth stones from the next brook he chose. cowl.
this venerable champicn will come into the field, armed
only with a pocket-pistol, before his old rusty brea/plate could
be scoured, and his cracked headpiece mended. swift.
bre'ast plow gh. m. s. [from bree/l and plough..] a plough used
for paring turf, driven by the breast. -
t he brea/plough which a man shoves before him. mortim.
bre"as trop es. m. s. [foom lzeds and rope.] in a ship. those
ropes which fasten the yards to the parrels, and, with the par-
rels hold the yards fast to the mast. harris.
bre'astwork. m. s. [from breas! and work.] works thrown
up as high as the breast of the defendants; the same with
parapet. -
sir john astley cast up breas:'works, and made a redoubt for
the defence of his men. clar endon.
breath. n.s.. [bnabe, saxon.]
1. the air drawn in and ejected out of the body by living ani-
mals.
whither are they vanish'd
into the air : and what seem’d corporal
melted, as breath into the wind. shakespeare's macbeth.
2. life.
no man has more contempt than 1 of breath;
but whence hast thou the pow'r to give me death dryden.
3. the state or power of breathing freely; opposed to the con-
dition in which a man is breathless and spent.
at other times, he casts to sue the chace
of swift wild beasts, or run on foot a race,
to enlarge his breath, large breath in arms most needful,
or else, by wrestling, to wax strong and heedful. spenser.
what is your difference? speak.-
—i am scarce in breath, my lord. shakosh. king lear.
spaniard, take brea. h; some respite l’il afford;
my cause is more advantage than your sword.
our swords so wholly did the fates employ,
that they, at length, grew weary to destroy;
refus’d the work we brought, and out of breath,
made sorrow and despair attend for death. dryden's mureng.
4. respite ; pause; relaxation.
give me some breath, some little pause, dear lord,
before i positively speak. shakespeare's richard iii.
5. breeze; moving air. .
vent all thy passion, and i’ll stand its shock,
calm and unruffled as a summer's sea,
when not a breath of wind flies o'er its surface. addis. cato.
6. a single act; an instant.
you menace me, and court me in a breath,
your cupid looks as dreadfully as death. dryden.
bre at hable. adj. [from breath..] that may be breathed;
as, breathable air.
to breathe. v. n. [from breath.]
1. to draw in and throw out the air by the lungs; to inspire
and expire.
he safe return'd, the race of glory past,
new to his friends embrace, had breath'd his last. pope.
2. to live.
let him breathe, between the heav’ns and earth,
a private man in athens. shakesp. antony and cleofatra.
3. to take breath ; to rest.
he presently follow'd the victory so hot upon the scots, that
he suffered them not to breathe, or gather themselves together
again. spenser's state of ireland.
three times they breath'd, and three times did they drink,
upon agreement. shakespeare's henry iv.
rest, that gives all men life, gave him his death,
and too much breathing put him out of breath. milton.
when france had breath'd, after intestine broils,
and peace and conquest crown'd her foreign toils. roscomm.
4. to pass as air.
shall i not then be stifled in the vault,
to whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
and there be strang!'d eremy romeo comes 2
to breath e. v. a.
1. to inspire, or inhale into one's own body, and eject or ex-
pire out of it.
dryden.
shakesp.
they wish to live,
their pains and poverty desire to bear,
to view the light of heav'n, and breathe the vital air. dryd.
they here began to breathe a most delicious kind of aether,
and saw all the fields about them covered with a kind of pur-
ple light. tatler.
2. to inject by breathing: with into.
he breathed into us the breath of life, a vital active spirit;
whose motions, he expects, should own the dignity of its ori-
ginal. decay of piety.
i would be young, be handsome, be belov’d,
could i but breathe myself into adrastus.
3. to expire; to eject by breathing: with out.
she is called, by ancient authors, the tenth muse; and, by
plutarch, is compared to caius, the son of vulcan, who
dryden.
breathed out nothing but flame. spedator.
4. to exercise; to keep in breath.
thy greyhounds are as swift as breathed stags. shakes.
5. to inspire; to move or actuate by breath.
the artful youth proceed to form the quire;
they breathe the flute, or strike the vocal wire. prior.
6. to exhale; to send out as breath.
his altar breather
ambrosial odours, and ambrosial flow'rs. milton's par. left.
7. to utter privately.
i have tow’rd heav'n breath'd a secret vow,
to live in pray’r and contemplation. shakesp. mr. of war.
8. to give air or vent to.
the ready cure to cool the raging pain,
is underneath the foot to breathe a vein.
bre at her... n.s.. [from breathe.]
1. one that breathes, or lives.
she shows a body rather than a life,
a statue than a breather. shakesp. antony and cleopatra.
i will chide no breather in the world but myself. shakesp.
2. onc that utters any thing.
no particular scandal once can touch,
but it confounds the breather. shakesp. meas for 4measure.
3. inspirer; one that animates or infuses by inspiration.
the 'reather of all life does now expire:
his milder father summons him away.
bre’athing.. n. s. [from breathe.]
1. aspiration; secret prayer.
while to high heav'n his pious breathings turn'd,
weeping he hop'd, and sacrificing mourn'd.
2. breatning place; vent.
the warmth distends the chinks, and makes
new breathings, whence new nourishment she takes. dryd.
bx e athless. adj. [from breath.]
1. out of breath; spent with labour.
well knew
the prince, with patience and sufferance sly,
so hasty heat soon cooled to subdue;
tho' when he breathloss wax, that battle 'gan renew. fairy®.
i remember, when the fight was done,
when i was dry with rage, and extreme toil, -
breathloss, and faint, leaning upon my sword,
came there a certain lord. shakesp. henry iv.
many so strained themselves in their race, that they fell
dryden's wirgil.
norris.
prior.
down breathloss and dead. aayward.
breathls; and tir'd, is all my fury spent
or does my giutted spleen at length relent? dryden's zn.
2. dead.
kneeling before this ruin of sweet life,
and breathing to this breathless excellence,
the incense of a vow, a holy vow. . . shakesp. king john.
yielding to the seatence, breathles, thou
and pale shalt lie, as what thou buriest now.
bred. particip, pass. [from to breed.]
their malice was lined in them, and their cogitation would
never be changed. , j/ isdom, xii. 1 o.
bred e. m. s. see braid.
in a curious brede of needlework, one colour falls away by
such just degrees, and another rises so insensibly, that we see
the variety without being able to distinguish the total vanishing
of the one, from the first appearance of the other. addison.
breech. n. s. [supposed from braccan, sax.]
1. the lower part of the body; the back part.
when the king's pardon was offered by a herauld, a lewd
boy turned towards him his naked breech, and used words suit-
able to that gesture. hayward.
the storks devour snakes and other serpents; which when
they begin to creep out at their breeches, they will presently clap
them close to a wall, to keep them in. grew's museum.
2. breeches.
ah! that thy father had been so resolv’d 1–
—that thou might still have worn the petticoat,
prior,
and ne'er had stol'n the breech from lancaster. shałoso.
3. the hinder part of a piece of ordnance.
so cannons, when they mount vast pitches,
are tumbl’d back upon their breeches. 4nonym.
to breec h. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to put into breeches.
2. to fit anything with a breech; as, to breech a gun.
bre'eches. n.s. [bnaec, sax. from bracca, an old gaulish word;
so that skinner imagines the name of the part covered with
breeches, to be derived from that of the garment. in this sense
it has no singular.]
1. the garment worn by men over the lower part of the body.
petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old jerkin, and a
pair of old breeches, thrice turned.
shaos-are's taring of the shrew.
rough
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 299</div><p class="text">b r e
b r e
§ -
wł.
him.
t th:
jda':
otions:
im, i.
lso
, thito
milvio
!.
s, i.e.
null, so
tdwoo:
; whitis.
lso
rola
–
ot,
cs.
* l.
a cus,
goo
stoo
it into
to
i jo g
fough satires, sly remarks, ill-natur'd speeches,
are always aim'd at poets that wear breeches. prior.
give him a single coat to make, he'd do't;
a vest or breeches, singly; but the brute -
cou’d ne'er contrive all three to make a suit. king.
2. to wear the breeches, is, to usurp the authority of the hus-
bands.
the wife of xanthus was domineering, as if her fortune, and
her extraction, had entitled her to the breeches. l'estrange.
*t2 breed. v. a. preter. i bred, i have bred. [braeban, sax.]
1. to procreate; to generate; to produce more of the species.
none ficreer in numidia bred, e
with carthage were in triumph led.
2. to produce from one's self.
children would breed their teeth with less danger.
3. to occasion; to cause ; to produce. -
thereat he roared for exceeding pain,
that, to have heard, great horrour would have bred. f. q.
our own hearts we know, but we are not certain what hope
the rites and orders of our church have bred in the hearts of
others. hooker.
what hurt ill company, and overmuch liberty, breedeth in
youth : astham's schoolmaster.
intemperance and lust breed infirmities and diseases, which,
being propagated, spoil the strain of a nation. tillotson.
4. to contrive ; to hatch 5 to plot.
my son edgar had he a hand to write this a heart and
brain to breed it in shakesp. king lear.
5. to give birth to ; to be the native place: so, there are breed-
ing ponds, and feeding ponds.
mr. harding, and the worthiest divine christendom hath
bred for the space of some hundreds of years were brought up
together in the same university. hooker.
hail, foreign wonder
whom, certain these rough shades did never breed. milton.
6. to educate; to form by education.
whoe'er thou art, whose forward ears are bent
on state affairs to guide the government;
hear first what socrates of old has said,
roscommon.
locke.
to the lov'd youth, whom he at athens bred. dryden,
to breed up the son to common sense,
is evermore the parent's least expence. dryden's juvenal.
and left their pillagers, to rapine bred,
without controul, to strip and spoil the dead. dryden.
his farm may not remove his children too far from him, or
the trade he breeds them up in. locke.
7. to bring up; to take care of from infancy.
ah, wretched me! by fates averse decreed
to bring thee forth with pain, with care to breed. dryden.
8. to conduct through the first stages of life.
bred up in grief, can pleasure be our theme *
our endless anguish, does not nature claim :
reason and sorrow are to us the same.
to bree d. v. n.
1. to bring young. - -
lucina, it seems, was breeding, as she did nothing but en-
tertain the company with a discourse upon the difficulty of rec-
koning to a day. - spedator.
2. to be encreased by new production.
but could youth last, and love still breed,
had joys no date, and age no need;
then these delights my mind might move
to live with thee, and be thy love.
3. to be produced; to have birth.
where they most breed and haunt, i have observ’d,
the air is delicate. shakespeare's macbeth.
there is a worm that breedeth in old snow, and dieth soon
after it cometh out of the snow. bacon's natural history.
the caterpillar is one of the most general of worms, and
breedoth of dew and leaves. bacon.
it hath been the general tradition and belief, that maggots
and flies breed in putrefied carcases. bentley.
4. to raise a breed.
in the choice of swine choose such to breed of as are of
long large bodies. mortimer.
breed. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. a cast; a kind; a subdivision of species.
l bring you witnesses,
twice fifteen thousand hearts of england's breed. shaksp.
the horses were young and handsome, and of the best breed
in the morth. shakspeare's henry viii.
walled towns, stored arsenals, and ordnance; all this is but
a sheep in a lion's skin, except the breed and disposition of the
people be stout and warlike. bacon's essays.
infectious streams of crowding sins began,
and through the spurious breed and guilty nation ran. ros.
rode fair ascanius on a firy steed,
queen dido's gift, and of the tyrian breed.
2. a family; a generation: in contempt.
a cousin of his last wife's was proposed; but john would
have no more of the breed. arbuthnot's history of j. bull.
3. progeny; offspring.
prior.
raleigh.
dryden.
if thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
as to thy friend; for when did friendship take -
a breed of barren metal of his friend ? shakesp. mer. of w.a.
4. a number produced at once; a hatch.
she lays them in the sand, where they lie till they are
hatched ; sometimes above an hundred at a breed. grew.
breedbate. m. s. [from breed and late.] one that breeds
quarrels ; an incendiary.
. an honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant shall come
in house withal; and, i warrant you, no teltale, nor no breed-
bate. shakespeare's merry wives of windsor.
bre'eper. n.s.. [from breed.] sp rry of so
1. that which produces anything.
time is the nurse and breeder of all good. shakespeare.
2. the person which brings up another.
time was, when italy and rome have been the best breeders
and bringers up of the worthiest men. aftham's schoolmaster.
3. a female that is prolifick.
get thee to a nunnery; why would'st thou be a breader of
sinners shakespeare's hamlet.
here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad,
amongst the fairest breeders of our time. shakes. tit. andr.
let there be an hundred persons in london, and as many in
the country, we say, that if there be sixty of them breeders in
london, there are more than sixty in the country. graunt.
yet if a friend a night or two should need her,
he'd recommend her as a special breeder. pope.
4. one that takes care to raise a breed.
the breeders of english cattle turned much to dairy, or else
kept their cattle to fix or seven years old. temple.
breed1n g. m. s. [from breed.]
1. education; instruction; qualifications.
she had her breeding at my father's charge,
a poor physician's daughter. shakespeare.
i am a gentleman of blood and breeding. shakesp. k. lear.
i hope to see it a piece of none of the meanest breeding, to be
acquainted with the laws of nature. glanville's scopsis, prof.
2. manners; knowledge of ceremony. -
as men of breeding, sometimes men of wit,
t’avoid great errours, must the less commit.
the graces from the court did next provide
breeding, and wit, and air, and decent pride.
3. nurture; care to bring up from the infant state.
why was my breeding order'd and prescrib'd,
as of a person separate to god,
design'd for great exploits 2 milton's agonister.
breese. n.s.. [bniora, saxon.] a stinging fly; the gadfly.
cleopatra,
the breeze upon her, like a cow in june,
hoists sail, and flies. shakesp. ant. and cleop.
the learned write, the inse&amp; brease
is but the mongrel prince of bees. hudibras.
a fierce loud buzzing breese, their stings draw blood,
and drive the cattle gadding through the wood. dryden.
breeze. m. s. [brezza, ital.] a gentle gale; a soft wind.
we find, that these hottest regions of the world, feated un-
der the equinoctial line, or near it, are so refreshed with a daily
gale of easterly wind, which the spaniards call breeze, that doth
ever more blow stronger in the heat of the day. raleigh.
from land a gentle breeze arose by night,
serenely shone the stars, the moon was light,
and the sea trembled with her filver light.
gradual sinks the breeze
into a perfect calm ; that not a breath
is heard to quiver through the closing wood.
bre'ezy, adj. [from breeze j fanned with gales.
the seer, while zephyrs curl the swelling deep,
basks on the breezy shore, in grateful sleep,
his oozy limbs.
bre'hon. m. s. an irish word. -
in the case of murder, the brehon, that is, their judge, will
compound between the murderer and the party murdered,
which prosecute the action, that the malefactor shall give unto
them, or to the child or wife of him that is slain, a recom-
pence, which they call an eriach. spenser.
breme. adj. [from bnemman, sax. to rage or fume.] cruel y
sharp; severe. not used.
and when the shining sun laugheth once,
you deemen the spring come at once :
but eft, when you count, you freed from fear,
comes the breme winter, with chamfred brows,
full of wrinkles, and frosty furrows. spenser.
brent. adj. [from bnennan, sax. to burn..] burnt. obsolete.
what flames, quoth he, when i thee present fee
in danger rather to be drent than brent p fairy queen.
brest. n.s.. [in archite&amp;ture.] that member of a column,
called also the torus, or tore.
br est summers. the pieces in the outward parts of any tim-
ber building, and in the middle floors, into which the girders
are framed. barris.
bret. n.s. a fish of the turbut kind, also burt or brut. dict.
br ethren. m. s. [the plural of brother.] see brother.
pope.
swifew
idryden,
thomson.
pope.
o
2.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 300</div><p class="text">b r i
b r h
all these se&amp;ts are brethren to each other in faction, igno-
, rance, iniquity, perverseness, pride. swift.
brefe, n s. [in musick.] a note or chara&amp;er of time, equi-
valent to two measures or minims. harris.
bre v1ary. m. s. [breviaire, fr. breviarium, lat.]
1. an abridgment; epitome; a compendium.
cresconius, an african bishop, has given us an abridgment,
or breviary thereof.
2. the book containing the daily service of the church of rome.
bre'v1at. n. s. [from brevis, brevio, lat.] a short compen-
dium.
it is obvious to the shallowest discourser, that the whole
counsel of god, as far as it is incumbent for man to know, is
comprised in one breviat of evangelical truth. decay of piety.
bre'v1at ure. m. s. [from brevio, lat..] an abbreviation.
bre'vi er. m. s. a particular size of letter used in printing ; so
called; probably, from being originally used in printing a bre-
viary ; as,
nor love thy life, nor hate, but what thou liv'st, -
live well, how long or short, permit to heav'n. milton.
bre'vity. n s. [brevitas, lat.] conciseness; shortness; con-
tradition into sew words.
virgil, studying brevity, and having the command of his
own language, could bring those words into a narrow com-
pass, which a translator cannot render without circumlocu-
tions. - dryden.
to brew. v. a. [brouwen, dutch; brawen, german; boyan,
saxon.]
1. to make liquors by mixing several ingredients.
we have drinks also brewed with several herbs, and roots,
and spices. bacon.
ayliff.
mercy guard me !
hence with thy brew’d enchantments, foul deceiver. milt.
2. to put into preparation,
here's neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all,
and another storm brewing. shakespeare.
3. to mingle.
take away these chalices; go, brew me a pottle of sack
finely. - shakspeare.
4. pope seems to use the word indeterminately.
or brew fierce tempests on the watry main,
or o'er the globe distil the kindly rain.
5. to contrive ; to plot.
i found it to be the most malicious and frantick surmise, and
the most contrary to his nature, that, i think, had ever been
brewed from the beginning of the world, howsoever counte-
nanced by a libellous pamphlet of a fugitive physician, even in
print. • //otton.
to brew. v. n. to perform the office of a brewer.
i keep his house, and wash, wring, brew, bake, scour, dress
meat, and make the beds, and do all myself. shakespeare.
brew. m. s. [from the verb.] manner of brewing ; or thing
brewed.
trial would be made of the like brew with potatoe roots, or
burr roots, or the pith of artichokes, which are nourishing
in eats. bacon.
bre was e. m. s. [from brew.j. mixture of various things.
go, brew me a pottle of fack finely.
—with eggs, fir 2
—simple of itself: i’ll no pullet-sperm in my brewage.
shakespeare.
bre'w er. n.s.. [from brew.] a man whose profession it is to
make beer.
when brewers marr their malt with water. shakespeare.
men every day eat and drink, though i think no man can
demonstrate out of euclid or apollonius, that his baker, or
brewer, or cook, has not conveyed poison into his meat or
drink. tillotson.
bre'w hous e. m. s. [from brew and house..] a house appropri-
ated to brewing.
in our brewhouses, bakehouses, and kitchens, are made divers
drinks, breads, and sneats. bacon.
bre'w ing. m. s. [from brew.] quantity of liquor brewed at
on cc.
a brewing of new beer, set by old beer, maketh it work
again. bacon,
bre'w is. m. s. -
1. a picce of bread soaked in boiling fat pottage, made of salted
meat. -
2. it seems anciently to have meant broath.
what an ocean of brewis shall i swim in
beaumont and fletcher's dioclesian.
pote.
br1'ar. m. s. see brier.
briee. m. s. [bribe, in french, originally signifies a piece of
bread, and is applied to any piece taken from the rest; it is
therefore likely, that a bribe originally signified, among us, a
share of any thing unjustly got.] a reward given to pervert
the judgment or corrupt the conduct.
you have condemn’d and noted lucius pella,
for taking bribes here of the sardians. shakespeare.
nor less my jupiter to gold ascribe,
//aller.
when he turn’d himself into a bribe.
if a man be eovetous, profits or bribes may put him to the
test. l’estrange.
there's joy when to wild will you laws prescribe,
when you bid fortune carry back her bribe. dryden.
to br be. v. a. [from the noun.j -
1. to gain by bribes ; to give bribes, rewards, or hire, to bad
purposes.
the great, 'tis true, can still th’ electing tribe,
the band may supplicate, but cannot bribe.
prologue to good-natured j.mazz.
2. it is seldom, and not properly, used in a good sense.
how pow'rful are chaste vows! the wind and tide
you brib'd to combat on the english side. dryden.
brieer. m. s. [from bribe..] one that pays for corrupt practices.
affe&amp;tion is still a briller of the judgment; and it is hard for
a man to admit a reason against the thing he loves; or to con-
fess the force of an argument against an interest. south.
bribery. m. s. [from trile.j i de crime of taking or giving
rewards for bad practices.
there was a law made by the romans, against the to ibery
and extortion of the governours of provinces: before, says ci-
cero, the governours did bribe and extort as much as was
sufficient for themselves; but now they bribe and extort as
much as may be enough not only for themselves, but for
judges, jurors, and magistrates. faczn.
no tribery of courts, or cabels of fashions, or advantages of
fortune, can remove him from the solid foundations of honour
and fidelity. 12 yarn.
rick. m. s. [brick, dutch ; brique, fr. according to achoge,
from imbrex, lat. whence brica j
i. a mass of burnt clay, fouared for the use of builders.
for whatsoever doth so alter a body, as it returneth not
again to that it was, may be called alteratio major ; as coals
made of wood, or bricks of carth. bacon.
they generally gain enough by the rubbish and bricks, which
the present architects value much beyond those of a modern
make, to defray the charges of their search. 4'doyan-
but spread, my sons, your glory thin or thick,
on passive paper, or on solid brick. poe.
2. a loaf shaped like a brick.
to brick. v. a. [from the noun..] to lay with bricks.
the sexton comes to know where he is to be laid, and whe-
ther his grave is to be plain or bricked. swift.
bri'ckba r. m. s. [from brick and bat.) a piece of brick.
earthen bottles, filled with hot water, do provoke in bed a
sweat more daintily than brickbots hot. bacon.
brickclay. m. s. [from brick and clay j clay used for m-k-
ing brick.
i observed it in pits wrought for tile and brickly. hoodw.
br1'ck dust. n. / [from brick and dy?..] dust made by pound-
ing bricks.
this ingenious author, being thus sharp set, got together
a convenient quantity of brickduff, and disposed of it into se-
veral papers. specia tor.
br1'ck earth. n.s.. [from brick and earth.] earth used in
making bricks.
they grow very well both on the hazelly loric/earths, and
on gravel. - - a4ertimer.
brick-kil n. m. s. [from brick and kiln.] a kiln; a place to
burn bricks.
like the israelites in the brick-kilns, they multiplied the more
for their oppression. decay of piety.
br1'cklayer. m.s.. [from brick and lay.] a man whose trade
it is to build with bricks; a brick-mason.
the elder of them, being put to nurse,
and ignorant of his birth and parentage,
became a bricklayer when he came to age.
if you had liv'd, fir,
time enough to have been interpreter
to babel's trick'ayers, sure the tow'r had stood. donre.
br1'ckmaker. m. s. [from brick and make..] one whose trade
it is to make bricks.
they are common in claypits; but the brickmakers pick
them out of the clay. - - - j/oodward.
br1'd.a. adj. [from bride.] belonging to a wedding; nuptial;
connubial.
our wedding chear to a sad fun'ral feast,
our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse. shakespeare.
come, i will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
shakspeare.
shakespeare.
the amorous bird of night
sung spousal, and bid haste the ev'ning star, -
on his hill-top to light the bridal lamp, milton.
your ill-meaning politician lords,
under pretence of bridal friends and guests, *
appointed to await me thirty spies. milton.
when to my arms thou brought'st thy virgin love,
fair angels sung our bridal hymn above. dryden.
with all the pomp of woe, and sorrow's pride i
oh, early lost oh, fitter to be led
in chearful splendour to the bridal bed | walsh.
- - for
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 301</div><p class="text">b r i
j".
'spoo.
tog:
it into
st.
in so,
for her the spouse pop. the bridal ring;
for her white virgin. hymenaeals fing. pope.
o of m. s. the nuptial festival.
brital. k. we must think, men are o gods;
y such observance always, ..
no. for shakespeare's othello,
a. day, so cool, so calm, so bright, -
the bridal of the earth and sky, • -
sweet dews shall weep thy fall to-night;
for thou must die. - herbert.
in death's dark bow'rs our bridal; we will keep,
is cold hand
†: curtain when we go to sleep. dryden.
bride, n.s. [bryo, saxon; brudur, in runick, signifies a
oil woman.] a woman new married.
bea help me mine own love's praises to resound,
niothe same of any be envy'd :
$oorpheus did for his own bride.
spenser.
the day approach'd, when fortune should decide
th’ important enterprize, and give the bride. dryden.
these are tributes due from pious brides, -
from a chaste matron, and a virtuous wife. smith.
*sop. n.s.. [from bride and bed.] marriage-bed.
now until the break of day,
through this house each fairy stray ;
to the best bridebed will we, -
which by us shall blessed be. shakespeare.
would david's son, religious, just, and brave,
to the first bridebed of the world receive -
a foreigner, a heathen, and a slave - - - prior.
bri'decake. n.s.. [from bride and cake.] a cake distributed to
the guests at the wedding.
with the phant'sies of hey-troll,
trollabout the bridal bowl,
and divide the broad bridecake * ,
round about the bride's stake. ben. johnson.
the writer, resolved to try his fortune, fasted all day, and,
that he might be sure of dreaming upon something at night,
procured an handsome slice of bridecake, which he placed very
conveniently under his pillow. speciator.
bri'degroom.. n.f. [from bride and groom.] a new married
masl.
as are those dulcet sounds in break of day,
that creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear,
and summon him to marriage. shakespeare.
why, happy bridegroom /
why dost thou steal so soon away to bed : dryden.
bri'demen. w. n.s. the attendants on the bride and bride-
bri'demaids. { groom.
basbestake. n.s. [from bride and stase.] it seems to be a
postset in the ground, to dance round, like a maypole:
round about the bridesake. ben. johnson.
britewell. n.s. [the palace built by st. bride's, or brid-
ga', will, was turned into a workhouse.] a house of correc-
iloil.
he would contribute more to reformation than all the work-
houses and bridewells in europe. speciator.
bridge, n.f. [bnic, saxon.]
1. a building raised over water for the convenience of passage.
what need the bridge much broader than the flood shak.
and proud araxes, whom no bridge could bind. dryden.
2. the upper part of the nose.
the raising gently the bridge of the nose, doth prevent the
deformity of a saddle nose. bacon.
3. the supporter of the strings in stringed instruments of musick.
to bridge. v. a. [from the noun..] to raise a bridge over
any place.
came to the sea; and over hellespont
bridging his way, europe with asia join'd.
br!'dle, n, s. [bride, fr.] -
1. the headstall and reins by which a horse is restrained and
governed. "
they seiz'd at last
his courser's bridle and his feet embrac'd.
2. a restraint; a curb ; a check. -
the king resolved to put that place, which some men fancied
to be a bridle upon the city, into the hands of such a man, as
he might rely upon. clarendon.
milton.
dryden.
o a bright genius often betrays itself into many errours, with-
&amp;: out a continual bridle on the tongue. watts.
o fo bridle. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to restrain, or guide by a bridle.
i bridle in my struggling muse with pain, - -
* that longs to launch into a bolder strain. addison.
* to put a bridle on anything.
- the queen of beauty stop'd her bridled doves; -
! . approv'd the little labour of the loves. prior.
of 3. to restrain; to govern.
!. the disposition of things is committed to them, whom law
may at all times bridle, and superiour power controul. hooker.
o with a strong, and yet a gentle hand,
1. you bridle faction, and our hearts command. i/aller,
.. wol. i.
*—
to bri'dle. v. n. to hold up the head. - - - -
bri'dlehand. m. s. [from bridle and hand.] the hand which
holds the bridle in riding.
in the turning, one might perceive the bridlehand something
gently stir; but, indeed, so gently, as it did rather distil vir.
tue than use violence. sidney.
the heat of summer put his blood into a ferment, which
affected his bridlehand with great pain. wisman,
brief. adj. [brevis, lat. brief, fr.]
i. short ; concise. it is now seldom used but of words.
a play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
which is as brief as i have known a play;
but by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
which makes it tedious. shakspears:
i will be mild and gentle in my words.—
—and brief, good mother, for i am in haste. shakesp.
i must begin with rudiments of art,
to teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
more pleasant, pretty, and effectual. shakespeare.
they nothing doubt prevailing, and to make it brief wars.
- - shakespeare's coriolanus.
the brief stile is that which expresseth much in little.
- ben. johnson.
if i had quoted more words, i had quoted more profane-
ness; and therefore mr. congreve has reason to thank me for
being brief. collier.
2. contracted; narrow. -
the shrine of venus, or straight pight minerva,
postures beyond brief nature. shakespeare.
brief. n.s.. [brief, dutch, a letter.]
1. a writing of any kind. -
there is a brief, how many sports are ripe:
make choice of which your highness will see first. shakes).
the apostolical letters are of a twofold kind and difference,
viz. some are called brief, because they are comprised in a
short and compendious way of writing. ayliffe.
2. a short extract, or epitome.
... but how you must begin this enterprize,
i will your highness thus in brief advise. fairy queen.
i doubt not but i shall make it plain, as far as a sum or brief
can make a cause plain. bacon.
the brief of this transaction is, these springs that arise here
are impregnated with vitriol. woodward,
3. [in law.]
a writ whereby a man is summoned to answer to any ac-
tion; or it is any precept of the king in writing, issuing out of
any court, whereby he commands any thing to be done.
cowel.
4. the writing given the pleaders, containing the case.
the brief with weighty crimes was charg’d,
on which the pleader much enlarg’d. swift.
5. letters patent, giving licence to a charitable colle&amp;tion for any
publick or private loss.
6. [in musick.] a measure of quantity, which contains two
strokes down in beating time, and as many up. harris.
bri'efly. adv. [from brief.] concisely; in few words.
i will speak in that manner which the subject requires; that
is, probably, and moderately, and briefly. bacon.
the modest queen a while, with downcast eyes, -
ponder'd the speech ; then brigsy thus replies. drydon.
br1'ef ness. n.s.. [from brief.] conciseness; shortness.
they excel in grandity and gravity, in smoothness and pro-
priety, in quickness and briefness. camden.
briter. m. s. [bjian, sax.] a plant. the sweet and the
wild sorts are both species of the rose.
what subtle hole is this,
whose mouth is cover'd with rude growing briers o shakso.
then thrice under a brier doth creep,
which at both ends was rooted deep,
and over it three times doth leap ;
her magick much availing. drayton's nymphid.
br1’ery. adj. [from brier.j rough ; thorny; full of briers.
brig, and possibly also brix, is derived from the saxon bnicz,
a bridge; which, to this day, in the northern counties, is called
a brigg, and not a bridge. gibson's camden.
brigade. m. s. [brigade, fr. it is now generally pronounced
with the accent on the last syllable.] a division of forces; a
body of men, consisting of several squadrons of horse, or bat-
talions of foot.
or fronted brigades form. milton.
here the bavarian duke his brigades leads, -
gallant in arms, and gaudy to behold. philips.
br1'gade major. an officer appointed by the brigadier to assist
him in the management and ordering of his brigade; and he
there acts as a major does in an army. harris,
brigadi’er general. an officer who commands a brigade of
horse or foot in an army; next in order below a major general.
br16 and. n.s.. [brigand, fr.] a robber; one that belongs
to a band of robbers. - - -
there might be a rout of such barbarous thievish brigands
in some rocks; but it was a degeneration from the o: of
man, a political creature. bramhall agains hos.
3 o bri'c and in e.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 302</div><p class="text">b r i
b r i
br 1"g andin e.
br1'gant in e. } m. s. [from brigand.]
1. a light vessel; such as has been formerly used by corsairs or
pirates.
like as a warlike brigandine, apply'd
to fight, lays forth her threatful pikes afore
the engines, which in them sad death do hide. spensor.
in your brigantine you sail'd to see
the adriatick wedded. otway's venice preserv'd.
the consul obliged him to deliver up his fleet, and restore
the ships, reserving only to himself two brigantines. arbuthnot.
2. a coat of mail.
then put on all thy gorgeous arms, thy helmet
and brigandine of brass, thy broad habergeon,
... vantbrass, and greves. milton's samson agonises.
bright. adj. [beost, saxon.]
1. shining; full of light.
through a cloud
drawn round about thee like a radiant shrine,
dark, with excessive bright, thy skirts appear.
then shook the sacred shrine, and sudden light
sprung through the roof, and made the temple bright. dryd.
2. shining as a body refle&amp;ling light.
milton.
bright brass, and brighter domes. chapman.
thy eyes are seen in diamonds bright. gay.
bright as the sun her eyes the gazers strike. pope.
3. clear; transpicuous.
from the brightest wines
he'd turn abhorrent. thomson.
while the bright seine to exalt the soul,
with sparkling plenty crowns the bowl. fenton.
4. clear; evident.
he must not proceed too swiftly, that he may with more
ease, with brighter evidence, and with surer success, draw the
learner on. watts's improvement of the mind.
5. resplendent with charms.
thy beauty appears,
in its graces and airs, r
all bright as an angel new drop'd from the sky: parnel.
o liberty, thou goddess heav'nly bright,
profuse of bliss, and pregnant with delight! addison.
bright as the sun, and like the morning fair,
. such chloe is, and common as the air. granville.
to day black omens threat the brightest fair
that e'er engag’d a watchful spirit's care. pope.
thou more dreaded foe, bright beauty, shine, 2%ung.
6. illuminated with science; sparkling with wit.
gen’rous, gay, and gallant nation,
great in arms, and bright in art. anonymous.
if parts allure thee, think how bacon shin'd,
the wisest, brightest, meanest of mankind. pope.
7. illustrious; glorious.
this is the worst, if not the only stain,
i' th' brightest annals of a female reign.
to bri'ght en. v. a. [from bright.]
1. to make bright; to make to shine.
the purple morning rising with the year,
salutes the spring, as her celestial eyes
adorn the world, and brighten up the skies.
2. to make luminous by light from without.
an ecstasy, that mothers only feel,
plays round my heart, and brightens all my sorrow,
like gleams of sunshine in a louring sky.
3. to make gay, or cheerful.
hope elevates, and joy
milton's paradse lost.
cotton.
dryden.
philips.
brightens his crest.
4. to make illustrious.
the present queen would brighten her chara&amp;ter, if she would
exert her authority to instil virtues into her people. swift.
yet time ennobles, or degrades each line;
it brighten’d craggs's, and may darken thine. pope.
5. to make acute, or witty.
to brighten. v. m. to grow bright; to clear up: as, the
sky brightens.
but let a lord once own the happy lines,
how the stile brightens, how the sense refines. pope.
br1'ghtly. adv. [from bright.] splendidly; with lustre.
safely i slept, till brightly dawning shone
the morn conspicuous on her golden throne.
br1'ghtness. m. s. [from bright.]
1. lustre; splendour; glitter.
the blazing brightness of her beauty's beam,
and glorious light of her sun-shining face,
to tell, were as to strive against the stream. fairy queen.
a sword, by long lying still, will contract a rust, which shall
deface its brightness. south.
the moon put on her veil of light,
mysterious veil of brightness made,
that's both her lustre and her shade.
vex'd with the present moment's heavy gloom,
why seek we brightness from the years to come *
2. acuteness.
pope.
hudibras.
prior.
the brightness of his parts, the solidity of his judgment, and
the candour and generosity of his temper, distinguished him
in an age of great politeness. prior.
brit liancy. m. s. [from brilliant..] lustre; splendour.
brit liant adj. [brillant, fr.] shining; sparkling; splen-
did ; full of lustre. -
so have i seen in larder dark
of veal a lucid loin,
replete with many a brilliant spark,
as wise philosophers remark,
at once both stink and shine. dorset.
bri'llia n.t. m. s. a diamond of the finest cut, formed into
angles, so as to refract the light, and shine more,
in deference to his virtues, i forbear
to shew you what the rest in orders were;
this brilliant is so spotless and so bright,
he needs not foil, but shines by his own proper light.
dryden.
bri'lliant ness. n. s. [from brilliant..] splendour; lustre.
brills. n. s. the hair on the eyelids of a horse. diff.
brim. n.s.. [brim, icelandish.]
1. the edge of any thing.
his hat, being in the form of a turban, daintily made, the
locks of his hair came down about the brims of it. bacon.
2. the upper edge of any vessel.
how my head in ointment swims?
how my cup o'erlooks her brims / crashaw.
so when with crackling flames a cauldron fries,
the bubbling waters from the bottom rise,
above the brims they force their firy way.
thus in a bason drop a shilling,
then fill the vessel to the brim,
you shall observe, as you are filling,
the pond’rous metal seems to swim. swift.
3. the top of any liquor.
the feet of the priests that bare the ark, were dipped in the
brim of the water. joshua, iii. 15.
4. the bank of a fountain.
it told me it was cynthia's own,
within whose cheerful brims
that curious nymph had oft been known
to bathe her snowy limbs.
to brim. v. a. [from the noun..] to fill to the top.
may thy brimmed waves, for this,
their full tribute never miss,
from a thousand rills.
this said, a double wreath evander twin'd;
and poplars black and white his temples bind:
then brims his ample bowl; with like design
the rest invoke the gods, with sprinkled wine.
to brim. v. n. to be full to the brim.
now horrid frays
commence, the brimming glasses now are hurl’d
with dire intent. philips.
br1'mful. adj. [from brim and full.] full to the top; over-
charged.
measure my case, how by thy beauty's filling,
with seed of woes my heart brimful is charg’d.
we have try’d the utmost of our friends;
our legions are brimful, our cause is ripe. shakesh. 7. caes.
her ; eyes, %. ready stood, p so. j. caes.
and only wanted will to weep a flood,
releas'd their watry store. dryden's fables.
the good old king at parting wrung my hand,
his eyes brimful of tears; then fighing, cry'd,
prithee, be careful of my son. addison's cato.
br1'mfulness. n.s.. [from brimful..] fulness to the top.
the scot, on his unfurnish'd kingdom,
came pouring like a tide into a beach,
with ample and brimfulness of his force. shakesp. hon. v.
brimmer. m. s. [from brim.j a bowl full to the top.
when healths go round, and kindly brimmers flow,
dryden’s aen.
drayton.
milton,
dryder;
sidney.
till the fresh garlands on their foreheads glow. dryden.
br1"mming. adj. [from brim.] full to the brim.
and twice besides her beestings never fail,
to store the dairy with a brimming pail. dryden.
bri'm ston e. m. s...[corrupted from brin or brenstone, that is,
firy stone..] sulphur. see sulphur.
from his infernal furnace forth he threw
huge flames, that dimmed all the heaven's light,
enroll'd in duskish smoke and brimstone blue. fairy
the vapour of the grotto del cane is generally supposed to
be sulphureous, though i can see no reason for such a suppo-
sition: i put a whole bundle of lighted brimslone matches to the
smoke, they all went out in an instant. addison on italy.
bri’m ston y. adj. [from brimstone..] full of brimstone; con-
taining sulphur; sulphureous.
bri'nded. adj. [brin, fr. a branch..] streaked; tabby; marked
with streaks.
thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd. shift. mariath.
she tam'd the brinded lioness,
and spotted mountain pard. milton.
my
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 303</div><p class="text">b r i
b. r. i
k
ls.
o
don
p.
op; or
|
's
|..}.
it'; f.
,
ifts.
it to,
ft. his
(u),
#37,
do
m.
o, o,
it,
finau,
so
this:
**
iso #
lost; &amp;
y into
§ |#.
so
}
my brinded heifer to the stake i lay; -
two thriving calves she suckles twice a-day. dryden.
br1'ndle. n.s.. [from brinded.] the state of being brinded.
a natural brindle. clarissa.
r1'ndle d. adj. [from brindle.] brinded; streaked.
the boar, my sisters! aim the fatal dart,
and strike the brindled monster to the heart. addison's ovid.
brine. n.s.
i. water impregnated with salt.
the encreasing of the weight of water, will encrease its
power of bearing; as we see brine, when it is salt enough, will
bear an egg. bacon's natural history.
dissolve sheeps dung in water, and add to it as much salt as
will make a strong brine, in this liquor steep your corn. mart.
2. the sea, as it is salt.
all, but mariners,
plung'd in the foaming brine, did quit the vessel,
then all afire with me. shakespeare's temps!.
the air was calm, and, on the level brine,
sleek panope, with all her sisters, play’d. milton.
as when two adverse winds
engage with horrid shock, the rufiled brine
roars stormy. philips.
3. tears, as they are salt.
what a deal of brine
hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for rosaline! shakesp.
br1'nepit. n.s.. [from brine and pit.] pit of salt water.
then i lov’d thee,
and shew'd thee all the qualities o' th' isle,
the fresh springs, brinepits, barren place, and fertile. shak.
to bring. v. a. ibninjan, sax, preter. i brought ; part. pass.
brought; brohe, sax.]
it. to fetch from another place; distinguished from to carry, or
convey, to another place.
i was the chief that rais'd him to the crown,
and i'll be chief to bring him down again. shakespeare.
and as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said,
bring me, i pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand. kings.
a registry of lands may furnish easy securities of money,
that shall be brought over by strangers. temple.
2. to convey in one's own hand; not to send by another.
and if my wish'd alliance please your king,
tell him he should not send the peace, but bring.
3. to produce; to procure, as a cause.
there is nothing will bring you more honour, and more ease,
than to do what right in justice you may. bacon.
to reduce; to recal.
bring back gently their wandering minds, by going before
them in the train they should pursue, without any rebuke. locke.
nathan's fable had so good an effect, as to bring the man after
god’s own heart to a right sense of his guilt. speciator.
5. to attract; to draw along.
in distillation, the water ascends difficultly, and brings over
with it some part of the oil of vitriol. newton's opticks.
6. to put into any particular state or circumstances, to make
liable to any thing.
having got the way of reasoning, which that study necessa-
rily brings the mind to, they might be able to transfer it to other
parts of knowledge, as they shall have occasion. locke.
the question for bringing the king to justice was immediately
put, and carried without any opposition, that i can find.
swift's presbyterian plea.
dryden.
7. to lead by degrees.
a due confideration of the vanities of the world, will natu-
rally bring us to the contempt of it; and the contempt of the
world will as certainly bring us home to ourselves. l’estrange.
the understanding should be brought to the difficult and
knotty parts of knowledge, by insensible degrees. locke.
8. to recal; to summons.
but those, and more than i to mind can bring,
menalcas has not yet forgot to sing. dryden.
9. to induce; to prevail upon.
the nature of the things, contained in those words, would
not suffer him to think otherwise, how, or whensoever, he is
brought to refle&amp;t on them. locke.
it seems so preposterous a thing to men, to make themselves
unhappy in order to happiness, that they do not easily bring
themselves to it. locke.
profitable employments would be no less a diversion than any
of the idle sports in fashion, if men could but be brought to
delight in them. locke.
10. to bring about. [see about..] to bring to pass; to effect.
this he conceives not hard to bring about,
if all of you would join to help him out. dryden's ind. emp.
this turn of mind threw off the oppositions of envy and
competition; it enabled him to gain the most vain and imprac-
ticable into his designs, and to bring about several great events,
for the advantage of the publick. addison's freeholder.
11. to bring forth. to give birth to ; to produce.
- the good queen,
for she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter:
here 'tis ; commends it to your blesling. shakspeare,
more wonderful
than that which, by creation, first brought forth . .
light out of darkness! paradis, loft,
bewail thy falsehood, and the pious works
it hath brought forth, to make thee memorable
among illustrious women, faithful wives. milton's agonisł.
bellona leads thee to thy lover's hand,
another queen brings forth another brand,
to burn with foreign fires her native land! dryden:
idleness and luxury bring forth poverty and want; and this
tempts men to injustice; and that causeth enmity and animo-
sity. tillotson.
the value of land is raised, when it is fitted to bring forth a
greater quantity of any valuable product. locke.
12. to bring forth. to bring to light.
the thing that is hid, bringeth he forth to light.
- job, xxxviii. 11.
13. to bring in. to place in any condition.
he protests he loves you,
and needs no other suitor, but his liking,
to bring you in again. shakespeare's othells.
14. to bring in. to reduce.
send over into that realm such a strong power of men, as
should perforce bring in all that rebellious rout, and loose peo-
ple. spenser on ireland.
15. to bring in. to afford gain.
the sole measure of all his courtesies is, what return they will
make him, and what revenue they will bring him in. south.
trade brought us in plenty and riches. locke.
16. to bring in. to introduce.
entertain no long discourse with any ; but, if you can, bring
in something to season it with religion. taylor.
there is but one god, who made heaven and earth, and sea
and winds; but the folly and madness of mankind brought in
the images of gods. stillingfleet.
the fruitfulness of italy, and the like, are not brought in by
force, but naturally rise out of the argument. addison:
* since he could not have a seat among them himself, he would
bring in one who had more merit. tatler.
quotations are best brought in, to confirm some opinion
controverted. ' swift.
17. to bring off. to clear; to procure to be acquitted; to cause
to escape.
i trusted to my head, that has betrayed me; and i found
fault with my legs, that would otherwise have brought me off.
- l’estrange.
set a kite upon the bench, and it is forty to one he'll bring
off a crow at the bar. l’estrange.
the best way to avoid this imputation, and to bring off the
credit of our understanding, is to be truly religious. tillotson.
18. to bring on. to engage in action.
if there be any that would reign, and take up all the time,
let him find means to take them off, and bring others on. bacon.
19. to bring on. to produce as an occasional cause.
the fountains of the great deep being broke open, so as a
general destruction and devastation was brought upon the earth,
and all things in it. burnet's theory:
the great question, which, in all ages, has disturbed man-
kind, and brought on them those mischiefs. locke.
20. to bring over. to convert; to draw to a new party.
this liberty should be made use of upon few occasions, of
small importance, and only with a view of bringing over his
own side, another time, to something of greater and more pub-
lick moment. swift on the sentiments of a church of engl, man.
the protestant clergy will find it, perhaps, no difficult mat-
ter to bring great numbers over to the church. swift.
21. to bring out. to exhibit; to shew.
if i make not this cheat bring out another, and the shearers
prove sheep, let me be unrolled. shakesp. winter's tale.
which he could bring out, where he had,
and what he boright them for, and paid. hudibrar.
these shake his soul, and, as they boldly press,
bring out his crimes, and force him to confess. dryden,
another way made use of, to find the weight of the dena-
rii, was by the weight of greek coins; but those experiments
bring out the denarius heavier. arbuthnot.
22. to bring under. to subdue; to repress. w
that sharp course which you have set down, for the bringing
under of those rebels of ulster, and preparing a way for their
perpetual reformation. spenser.
to say, that the more capable, or the better deserver, hath
such right to govern, as he may compulsorily bring under the
less worthy, is idle. bacon.
23. to bring up. to educate; to instruct; to form.
the well bringing up of the people, serves as a most sure
bond to hold them, sidney.
he that takes upon him the charge of bringing up young
men, especially young gentlemen, should have something more
in him than latin. locke.
they frequently conversed with this lovely virgin, who had
been brought up by her father in knowledge. addison's guardian.
24. to bring up, to introduce to general practice.
f - - several
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 304</div><p class="text">b r i
-
several obliging deferences, condescensions, and submis-
sons, with many outward forms and ceremonies, were first of
all brought up among the politer part of mankind, who lived
in courts and cities. speciator.
25. to bring up. to cause to advance.
bring up your army; but, i think, you'll find,
they've not prepar'd for us. shakespeare.
26. bring retains in all its senses' the idea of an agent, or cause
producing a real or metaphorical motion of something towards
fomething; for it is oft said, that he brought his companion out.
the meaning is, that he was brought to something that was
likewise without, -
bri'nger. n.s.. [from bring.] the person that brings anything.
yet the first bringer of unwelcome news
hath but a losing office: and his tongue
sounds ever after as a sullen bell,
remember'd tolling a dead friend.
best you see safe the bringer
out of the host: i must attend mine office. shakespeare.
bri'nger up. instructor; educator.
italy and rome have been breeders and bringers up of the
worthiest men. ascham's schoolmaster.
br1'nish. adj. [from brine.] having the taste of brine; salt.
nero would be tainted with remorse
to hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears. shakespeare.
for now i stand, as one upon a rock,
environ'd with a wilderness of sea,
who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave;
expecting ever when some envious surge
will, in his brinish bowels, swallow him. shakespeare.
br1'nishn ess. n.s.. [from brinish.] saltness; tendency to salt-
ness.
brink. m. s. [brink, danish.] the edge of any place, as of
a precipice or a river.
th’ amazed flames stand gather'd in a heap,
and from the precipice's brink retire,
shakespeare.
afraid to venture on so large a leap. dryden.
we stand therefore on the brinks and confines of those states
at the day of doom. atterbury.
so have i seen, from severn's brink,
a flock of geese jump down together;
swim where the bird of jove wou'd fink,
and, swimming, never wet a feather. swift.
br1'ny, adj. [from brine.] salt.
he, who first the passage try’d,
in harden'd oak his heart did hide ;
or his, at least, in hollow wood,
who tempted first the briny flood. dryden.
then, briny seas, and tasteful springs, farewel,
where fountain nymphs, confus'd with nereids, dwell. add.
a muriatick or briny taste seems to be produced by a mixture
of an acid and alkaline salt; for spirit of salt, and salt of tartar,
mixed, produce a salt like sea salt. arbuthnot.
br1'ony. see bryon y.
brisk. adj. [brusque, french.]
1. lively; vivacious; gay; sprightly: applied to men.
- pr’ythee, die, and set me free,
or else be
kind and brisk, and gay like me. denham. .
a creeping young fellow, that had committed matrimony
with a brisk gamesome lass, was so altered in a few days, that
he was liker a skeleton than a living man. l'earange.
why shou'd all honour then be ta'en
from lower parts, to load the brain:
when other limbs we plainly see,
each in his way, as brisk as he prior,
2. powerful ; spirituous.
our nature here is not unlike our wine;
some sorts, when old, continue brisk and fine, denham.
under ground, the rude riphaean race
mimick brisk cyder, with the brake's product wild,
sloes pounded, hips, and servis’ harshest juice. philips.
it must needs be some exteriour cause, and the brisk acting
of some objects without me, whose efficacy i cannot resist. locke.
3. vivid; bright. this is not used. -
objects appeared much darker, because my instrument was
overcharged; had it magnified thirty or twenty-five times, it
had made the object appear more brisk and pleasant. newton.
3% brisk up. v. n. to come up briskly.
br1's ket. n.s.. [brichet, fr.] the breast of an animal.
see that none of the wool be wanting, that their gums be
red, teeth white and even, and the brisket skin red. mortimer.
br1'skly. adv. [from brisk.] aetively; vigorously.
we have seen the air in the bladder suddenly expand itself
so much, and so briskly, that it manifestly lifted up some light
bodies that leaned upon it. boyle.
i could plainly perceive the creature to suck in many of the
most minute animalcula, that were swiming briskly about in
the water. ray on the creation,
bri'skness. m. s. [from brisk.]
1. liveliness; vigour; quickness.
some remains of corruption, though they do not conquer
6
and extinguish, yet will slacken and allay the vigour and trift-
ness of the renewed principle. south.
2. gayety.
but the most distinguishing part of his character seems to
me, to be his briskness, his jollity, and his good humour. dryd.
bristle. m. s. [bnirzl, sax.] the stiff hair of swine.
i will not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter. shakesh.
he is covered with hair, and not as the boar, with bristles,
which probably spend more upon the same matter, which, in
other creatures, makes the horns; for bristles seem to be no-
thing else but a horn split into a multitude of little ones. grew.
two boars whom love to battle draws,
with rising briftles, and with frothy jaws,
their adverse breasts with tusks oblique they wound. dryd.
to bri'stle. v. a. [from the noun.] to erect in bristles.
now for the bare pickt bone of majesty,
doth dogged war bristle his angry crest,
and snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace. shakespeare.
which makes him plume himself, and briffle up
the crest of youth against your dignity. shakespeare.
ta bri's tle. v. n. to stand erect as bristles.
be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
pard, or boar with brislled hair,
in thy eye that shall appear,
when thou wak'st, it is thy dear.
stood theodore surpriz'd in deadly fright,
with chatt’ring teeth, and brisling hair upright;
shakespeare,
yet arm'd with inborn worth. dryden,
thy hair so bristles with unmanly fears,
as fields of corn that rise in bearded ears. dryden.
ta bristle a thread. to fix a bristle to it.
br1's tly. adj. [from bristle.] thick set with bristles.
the leaves of the black mulberry are somewhat briftly,
which may help to preserve the dew. bacon.
if the eye were so acute as to rival the finest microscope, the
sight of our own selves would affright us; the smoothest skin
would be beset with rugged scales and bristly hairs. bentley.
thus mastful beech the briftly chesnut bears,
and the wild ash is white with bloomy pears. dryden:
the careful master of the swine, -
forth hasted he to tend his briftly care. pope.
bri'stol stone. a kind of soft diamond found in a rock near
the city of bristol.
of this kind of crystal are the better and larger sort of bri.
solo/lones, and the kerry stones of ireland. woodward.
brit. n. s. the name of a fish. - -
the pilchards were wont to pursue the brit, upon whic
they feed, into the havens. carew.
to brit e. v. n. barley, wheat, or hops, are said to brite,
to bright. : when they grow over-ripe.
brittle, adj. ibnitzan, saxon.] fragile; apt to break;
not tough.
the wood of vines is very durable; though no tree hath the
twigs, while they are green, so brittle, yet the wood dried is
extremely tough. - bacon.
from earth all came, to earth must all return,
frail as the cord, and brittle as the urn. prior.
of airy pomp, and fleeting joys,
what does the busy world conclude at best,
but brittle goods, that break like glass : granville.
if the stone is brittle, it will often crumble, and pass in the
form of gravel. arbuthnot.
brittleness. n. s. [from brittle..] aptness to break; fra-
ility.
§ a wit quick without brightness, sharp without brittlenes.
ascham's schoolmaster.
artificers, in the tempering of steel, by holding it but a mi-
nute or two longer or lesser in the flame, give it very differing
tempers, as to brittleness or toughness. boyle.
brize. n.s. the gadfly.
a brize, a scorned little creature,
through his fair hide his angry sting did threaten. spensor.
broach. n.s.. [broche, french.]
i. a spit.
he was taken into service to a base office in his kitchen; so
that he turned a breach, that had worn a crown. bacon’s h. vii.
whose offered entrails shall his crime reproach,
and drip their fatness from the hazle broach. dryden.
2. a musical instrument, the sounds of which are made by turn-
ing round a handle. picf.
3. [with hunters.]. a start of the head of a young stag, growing
sharp like the end of a spit. idic?.
to broach. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to spit; to pierce as with a spit.
were now the general of our gracious empress,
as in good time he may, from ireland coming,
bringing rebellion broached on his sword. shakespeare.
he felled men as one would mow hay, and sometimes
broached a great number of them upon his pike, as one would
carry little birds spitted upon a stick. hakewill.
2. to pierce a vessel in order to draw the liquor; to tap.
3. to open any store.
i will
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 305</div><p class="text">b. r o
• *
off,
so
- - ovide, that you shall want neither weapons,
o o, i oil open the old armouries, i will broach
.. and bring forth my stores. knolles.
my
- n thing. -
4. to o field of death, the lists,
ter'd by antagonists, -
. was {j to be broach o,
when hudibras in haste o d.
- t, or utter anything:
5. "#. that pison was ganges, was first broached by
raleigh.
*...to were the chief instruments of raising the noise,
..f. of those very opinions themselves had broached, for
some to prove, that the change of ministers was dange-
o
ous - swift's examiner.
r -
bro’acher: n. s. [from broach.]
1. a *. youth approach'd the fire, and, as it burn'd,
on five sharp broacher: rank'd, the roast they turn’d;
these morsels stay'd their stomachs. dryden.
2. an opener, or utteo of any thing; the first authour.
role is much pride and vanity in the affectation of being
the first broadher of an heretical opinion. l’estrange.
numerous parties denominate themselves, not from the
grand authout and finisher of our faith, but from the first
joacher of their idolized opinions. decay of piety.
this opinion is commonly, but falsely, ascribed to aristotle,
not as its first broacher, but as its ablest patron. cheyne.
broad, adj. ibnab, saxon.]
o † in breadth; distinguished from length; not
rrow. -
"fiewed: that his broad spreading leaves did shelter,
are pull'd up root and all. shakespeare.
the top may be justly said to grow broader, as the bottom
hudibras.
-
narrower. temple.
of all your knowledge this vain fruit you have,
to walk with eyes broad open to your grave. dryden.
solofty was the pile, a parthian bow,
with vigour drawn, must send the shaft below,
the bottom was full twenty fathom broad.
he launch'd the fiery bolt from pole to pole,
broad burst the lightnings, deep the thunders roll.
, large. -
2 #. keep him at a distance from falsehood and culining,
which has always a broad mixture of falsehood; this is the fit-
test preparation of a child for wisdom. locke.
3, clear; open; not sheltered, not affording concealment.
in mean time he, with cunning to conceal
althought of this from others, himself bore
in had house, with the wooers us before. chapman.
it no longer seeks the shelter of night and darkness, but ap-
pears in the broad's light. decay of piety.
if children were left alone in the dark, they would be no
more afraid than in broad sunshine. locke.
4. gross; coarse.
the reeve and the miller are distinguished from each other,
as much as the lady prioress and the broad speaking gap-tooth-
dryden.
pope.
ed wife of bath. dryden.
love made him doubt his broad barbarian found ;
by love, his want of words and wit he found. dryden.
if open vice be what you drive at,
a name so broad will ne'er connive at. dryden.
. the broads mirth unfeeling folly wears,
less pleasing far than virtue's very tears. pope.
room for my lord ' three jockeys in his train;
six huntsmen with a shout precede his chair;
he grins, and looks broad nonsense with a stare. pope.
5. obscene; fulsome ; tending to obscenity.
as chaste and modest as he is esteemed, it cannot be denied,
but in some places he is broad and fulsome. dryden.
though now arraign'd, he read with some delight;
because he seems to chew the cud again,
when his broad comment makes the text too plain.
6. bold; not delicate; not reserved.
who can speak broader than he that has no house to put his
head in? such may rail against great buildings. shakespeare.
from broad words, and 'cause he fail'd
his presence at the tyrant's feast, i hear,
macduff lives in disgrace.
broad as long. equal upon the whole.
the mobile are still for levelling; that is to say, for advanc-
ing themselves: for it is as broad as long, whether they rise to
others, or bring others down to them. l’e/?range.
broad-cloth, n.s. [from broad and cloth.] a fine kind of cloth.
thus, a wise taylor is not pinching;
but turns at ev’ry seam an inch in :
or else, be sure, your broad-cloth breeches
will ne'er be smooth, nor hold their stitches.
dryd.
shakoff care.
swift.
o broad-eyed, adj. [from broad and eye.] having a wide survey.
s.” in despite of broad-ey'd watchful day,
- {would into thy bosom pour my thoughts:
but, ah! i will not. shakespeare.
s: vol. i.
*—
bo movie. adj. [from broad and leaf.] having broad
narrow and broad-leaved cyprus-grass. woodward on fossil.
to broaden. v. n. [from broad.] to grow broad. "i ow
not whether this word occurs, but in the following passage.
how walks the sun, and broadens by degrees,
just o'er the verge of day.
*adly. adv. [from broad] in a broad manner.
br6 adness. n.f [from broad.]
i. breadth; extent from fide to fide.
2. coarseness; fulsonmeness.
i have used the cleanest metaphor i could find, to palliate
the broadness of the meaning. dryden.
broadshoulder ed. adj. [from broad and shoulder.] having
a large space between the shoulders.
big-bond, and large of limbs, with finews strong,
broadshoulder'd, and his arms were round and long. bryden.
i am a tall, broadshoulder'd, impudent, black fellow ; and, as
i thought, every way qualified for a rich widow. spectator.
br9 apside. n.s.. [from broad and side j
1. the side of a ship, distinet from the head or stern.
from vaster hopes than this he seem'd to fall,
that durst attempt the british admiral :
from her broadsides a ruder flame is thrown,
than from the fiery chariot of the sun. -
2. the volly of shot fired at once from the side of a ship.
3. []n printing.] a sheet of paper containing one large page.
br.o.adsword. n. s. [from broad and sword.]. a cutting sword,
with a broad blade.
he, in fighting a duel, was run through the thigh with a
broadsword. //iseman.
bro'adwise. adv. [from broad and wise.] according to the di-
rection of the breadth.
if one should, with his hand, thrust a piece of iron broad-
wise against the flat cieling of his chamber, the iron would
not fall as long as the force of the hand perseveres to press
against it. boyle.
brocat).e. n. s. [brocado, span.] a filken stuff, variegated
with colours of gold or silver.
i have the conveniency of buying and importing rich bra-
cades. spectator.
or stain her honour, or her new brocade,
forget her pray'rs, or miss a masquerade.
brocaded. adj. [from brocade.]
1. drest in brocade.
2. woven in the manner of a brocade.
should you the rich brocaded suit unfold, -
where rising flow’rs grow stiff with frosted gold.
bro'cage. m. s. [from broke.]
1. the gain gotten by promoting bargains.
yet sure his honesty
got him small gains, but shameless flattery,
and filthy brocage, and unseemly shifts,
and borrow base, and some good ladies gifts. spenser.
2. the hire given for any unlawful office.
as for the politick and wholesome laws, they were inter-
preted to be but brocage of an usurer, thereby to woo and win
the hearts of the people. bacon.
3. the trade of dealing in old things; the trade of a broker.
poor poet ape, that would be thought our chief,
whose works are e'en the frippery of wit,
from brocage is become so bold a thief,
as we, the robb’d leave rage, and pity it.
4. the transaction of business for other men.
so much as the quantity of money is lessened, so much must
the share of every one that has a right to this money be the less,
whether he be landholder, for his goods, or labourer, for his
hire, or merchant, for his brocage. locke.
broccol.i. m. s. [italian.] a species of cabbage.
content with little, i can piddle here,
on broccoli and mutton round the year;
but ancient friends, tho' poor or out of play,
that touch my bell, i cannot turn away.
to broch e. see to broach.
so geoffry of boullion, at one draught of his bow, shoot-
ing against david's tower in jerusalem, broched three feetless
birds. camden.
brock. m. s. [bnoc, saxon.] a badger.
brock e.t. n.s. a red deer, two years old.
brogue. m. s. [brog, irish.]
1. a kind of a shoe.
i thought he slept; and put
my clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
answer'd my steps too loud. shakespeare,
sometimes it is given out, that we must either take these
halfpence, or eat our brogues. swift.
2. a cant word for a corrupt diale&amp;t, or manner of pronuncia-
tion.
his brogue will dete&amp;t mine. ... farquhar,
t, brotder. v. a. [brodir, fr.] to adorn with figures of
needle-work.
exodus.
a robe, and a broider'd coat, and a girdle.
3 p infant
thomson.
jvaller.
pope.
gay,
ben. johnson.
pope.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 306</div><p class="text">b. r o
- - infant albion la
o oo::}%. o'er with gorgeous oil. tickell.
oi...! rom broider.] embroidery ; flower-work;
the gold. o upon cloth.
the breast ”idery tender milkah wove,
". o o sacred, and to love,
and mang!ed. ---
broil. m. s. [brouillor, fr.] a tumult; a quarrel yockell.
say to the king thy knowledge of the this, "
#. thou didst leave it. o 2 shakespeare
..o.o. the sword both of civil brails, and o
- asse.
to...; o and obscene their joys, -
er' *ards, and the lust of boys. granvill,
to broil. v. a. [bruler, fr.] to dress or y k by avion
the coals, or before the fire. coo y saying on
si..."; othesio,
to b - iceking entrails broil. dryden.
*911. v. n. to be in the heat.
where have you been broiling *—
- among the croudi’ th’ abbey, where a finger
could not be wedg'd in more. shaloftcore.
"get".now all the planets and comes had b. broiling
to the sun, had the world lasted from all eternity. cheyne.
7- broke. v. n. [of uncertain etymology. skinner seems in:
clined to derive it from 7o oreak, because broken men turn fac-
tors or brokers. casaubon, from wgzi's v. skinner thinks, again,
o ". be. contracted from procurer. mr. lye more pro-
ably deduces it from bnuccan, sax, to be busy.] to transact
business for others, or by others. it is used generally in re-
proach.
he does, indeed,
and brokes with all that can, in such a suit,
corrupt the tender honour of a maid. shakspeare.
the gains of bargains are of a more doubtful nature, when
men should wait upon others necessity; broke by servants and
instruments to draw them on. bacon.
brooking, particip. adj. practised by brokers.
redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,
wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt. shakespeare.
bro's en. sparticip. pass of breaf.] ./
preserve men's wits from being broken with the very bent
of so long attention. hooker.
brokes m.e.a.t. fragments; meat that has been cut.
get three or four chairwomen to attend you constantly in
the kitchen, whom you pay at small charges; only with the
broken meat, a few coals, and all the cinders. swift.
br9 kenhearted. ad;... [from broken and heart..] having
the spirits crushed by grief or scar.
he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted. isaiah.
br9 kenly. adv. [from broken...] without any regular se-
tics.
sir richard hopkins hath done somewhat of this kind, but
brokenly and glancingly ; intending chicfly a discourse of his
own voyage. hasewill,
brook er. m. s. [from 7% broke.]
1. a factor; one that does business for another; one that makes
bargains for another.
prokers, who, having no flock of their own, set up and trade
with that of other men; buying here, and scoling there, and
commonly abusing both sides, to make out a little paultry
temple.
idlil.
&amp; some south-sea looker, from the city,
will purchase me, the more's the pity ;
lay all my fine plantations waste,
to fit them to his vulgar taste.
2. one who deals in old houshold goods.
3. a pimp ; a match-maker.
- a goodly broker /
dare you presume to harbour wanton lines;
to whisper and conspire against my youth shaos?care.
in chusing for yourself, you shew'd your judgment;
which being shallow, you shall give me leave
to play the broker in mine own behalf. shałos eare.
brookerage. m. s. [from broker.] the pay or reward of a
broker. see brocage.
bronchoce le. n.s. [350)xxon.] a tumour of that part
of the aspera arteria, called the bronchus. &amp;inoy.
#o adj. [3,4,292.1 bclonging to the throat.
bro'nchick. - - -
inflammation of the lungs may happen either in the oran:
chial or pulmonary vessels, and may soon be communicated
from one to the other, when the inflamination affects both
the lobes. arbuthnot.
bronchoromy. m. s. [??oyo and row.] that operation
which opens the windpipe by incision, to prevent suffootion
in a quinsey. &amp;tiny.
the operatio
arteria, to make way for the air into the
tion is obstructed by any tumour compro
szt if?.
n of bronomy is an incision into the aspera
lungs, when respira-
sing the larynx.
sharp's surgery.
baosp. m. s. see brand. a sword, 7
foolish old man, said then the pagan wroth,
that weenest words or charms may force withstond,
soon shalt thou see, and then believe for troth,
that i can carve with this enchanted brond. soers",
brontology. n.s. [3;ovro and xoz.] a dissertation upon
thunder. d.c.
bronze. n.s.. [bronze, fr.]
1. brass.
imbrown'd with native bronze, lo! henley stands,
tuning his voice, and balancing his hands. pogo.
2. relief, or statue cast in brass.
i view with anger and disdain,
how little gives thee joy or pain ;
a print, a bronze, a flower, a root,
a shell, a butterfly can do’t. prior,
brooch. n.s.. [broke, dutch.]
1. a jewel ; an ornament of jewels.
ay, marry, our chains and our jewels.--
your brocches, pearls, and owches. shaks rare,
richly suited, but unseasonable; just like the brocch and the
toothpick, which we wear not now. sha&amp;#eart,
i know him well; he is the brooch, indeed,
and gem of all the nation. shakoffort.
2. [with painters..] a painting all of one colour. dio.
to brooch. v. a. [from the noun...] to adorn with jewels.
not th’ imperious shew
of the full-fortun’d caesar, ever shall
be brooch'd with me.
7% brood. v. n. ibna'dan, sax.]
i. to fit as on eggs; to hatch them.
thou from the first
wast present, and, with mighty wings outspread,
dove-like sat'st broodong on the vast abyss,
and mad'st it pregnant. aston.
here nature spreads her fruitful sweetness round,
breathes on the air, and broods upon the ground. dryden,
2. to cover chickens under the wing.
exalted hence, and drunk with secret joy,
their young succession all their cares employ;
they breed, they brood, instruct and educate,
and make provision for the future state. drydon,
find out some uncouth cell,
where brooding darkness spreads his jealous wings,
shakoffeare,
and the night raven sings. milon,
3. to remain long in anxiety, or solicitous thought, -
defraud their clients, and, to lucre sold,
sit brooding on unprofitable gold. drydin,
as rejoicing misers
brood o'er their precious stores of secret gold. smith,
4. to mature any thing by care.
it was the opinion of clinias, as if there were ever amongst
nations a brooding of a war, and that there is no sure league
but impuissance to do hurt. bacon,
to brood. v. a. to cherish by care.
of crouds afraid, yet anxious when alone,
you'll sit and brood your sorrows on a throne. dryden,
brood. m. s. [from the verb.]
1. offspring ; progeny. it is now hardly used of human be-
ings, but in contempt.
the heavenly father keep his brood
from foul infection of so great a vice. fairfox,
with terrours, and with clamours compass'd round,
of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed. 24ion,
or any other of that heav'nly brood,
let down in cloudy throne to do the world some good.
a filton.
aclian discourses of storks, and their affedion toward their
brood whom they instruct to fly. brown's /usgar errors.
2. thing bred; species generated.
have you forgotten libya's burning wastes,
its barren rocks, parch'd earth, and hills of sand,
its tainted air, and all its broods of poison :
3. a hatch; the number hatched at once. -
i was wonderfully pleased to see the different workings of
instinct in a hen followed by a brood of ducks. speciatir.
4. something brought forth; a production.
such things become the hatch and broad of time.
5. the act of covering the eggs.
something's in his soul,
o'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
and i doubt the hatch and the disclose
will be some danger. sha's care.
bro'opy. adj. [from broad.] in a state of fitting on the ‘go’"
inclinca to fit.
the common hen, all the while she is bready, sits, and leads
her chickens, and uses a voice which we call clocking. rey.
brook. m. / [brioc, or broca, sax.] a running w* :13
than a river.
a substitute shines brightly as a king,
until a king be by ; and then his state
empties itself, as doth an inland brok
into the main of waters,
moon.
1. " o
shao.
so.
r
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 307</div><p class="text">b r o
b. r o
or many grateful altars i would rear,
of grafly turf; and pile up every stone,
of austre, from the brook; in memory,
of monument to ages.
and to cephisus' brook their way pursue:
the stream was troubled, but the ford they knew. dryden.
springs make little rivulets; those united, make brooks; and
those coming together, make rivers, which empty themselves
into the sea. locke.
to brook. v.a.[bnucan, sax.] to bear; to endure; to support.
even they, which brook it worst, that men should tell them
of their duties, when they are told the same by a law, think
very well and reasonably of it. hooker.
a thousand more mischances than this one,
have learned me to brook this patiently.
how use doth breed a habit in a man
this shadowy desart, unfrequented woods,
milton.
shakspeare.
i better brock than flourishing peopl’d towns. shakespeare.
- heav'n, the seat of bliss,
brooks not the works of violence, and war. milton.
most men can much rather brook their being reputed knaves,
than for their honesty be accounted fools. south.
restraint thou wilt not brook; but think it hard,
your prudence is not trusted as your guard. dryden.
to brook. v. m. to endure; to be content.
he, in these wars, had flatly refused his aid; because he
could not brook, that the worthy prince plangus was, by his
chosen tiridates, preferred before him. sidney.
brookli m.e. m. s. [becabunga, lat..] a sort of water speed-
well, very common in ditches.
broom. m. s. [genisła; brom, saxon.]
1. a small tree.
ev’n humble broom, and osiers, have their use,
and shade for sheep, and food for flocks, produce. dryden.
2. a besom; so called from the matter of which it is sometimes
made.
not a mouse
shall disturb this hallow'd house;
i am sent with broom before,
to sweep the dust behind the door. shakespeare.
if they came into the best apartment, to set any thing in or-
der, they were saluted with a broom. arbuthnot.
bro'ox land. m. s. [broom and land.] land that bears broom.
i have known sheep cured of the rot, when they have not
been far gone with it, by being put into broomlands. mortimer.
broom staf f. m. s. [from broom and staff.] the staff to which
the broom is bound; the handle of a beson.
they fell on ; i made good my place: at length they came
to the broomstaff with me; i defied 'em still. shakespeare,
from the age,
that children tread this worldly stage,
brooms aff, or poker, they bestride,
and round the parlour love to ride. prior.
sir roger pointed at something behind the door, which i
found to be an old broomslas. speciator.
broom1stick. the same as broomstaff.
when i beheld this, i fighed and said within myself, sure-
ly mortal man is a broom1st ick
swift's meditation on a broomstick.
bro'onix. adj. [from broom.] full of broom.
if land grow mossy or broomy, then break it up again. mort.
the youth with broomy stumps began to trace
the kennel edge, where wheels had worn the place. swift.
broth. n. s. [bnoo, sax.] liquor in which flesh is boiled.
you may make the broth for two days, and take the one
half cvery day. bacon.
instead of light deserts and luscious froth,
our author treats to-night with spartan by oth. southerme.
if a nurse, after being sucked dry, eats broth, the infant will
suck the broth almost unaltered. a buthnot.
bro"the l. n. s. (bordel, fr.] a house of lewd enter-
br o' t h e l hous e. ; tainment; a bawdyhouse.
perchance
i saw him enter such a house of sale,
videlicet, a brothel. shakespeare.
then courts of kings were held in high renown,
fre made the common brothels of the town :
there, virgins honourable vows receiv'd,
but chaste as maids in monasteries liv'd. dryden.
from its old ruins brothelhouses rise,
scenes of lewd loves, and of polluted joys. dryden.
the libertine retires to the stews, and to the brothel. rogers.
brother.. n. s. [b]:08en, bnoson, sax.] plural, brothers,
or brethren.
1. one born of the same father and mother.
be sad, good brothers;
sorrow so royally in you appears,
that i will deeply put the fashion on. shakos care.
whilst kin their kin, brother the brother foils,
like ensigns all, against like ensigns bend. daniel.
these two are brethren, adam, and to come
out of thy loins. milton.
2. an association of men for any purpose; a fraternity.
comparing two men, in reference to one common parent,
it is very easy to form the ideas of broor,
2. any one closely united ; associate.
we few, we happy few, we tand cf brothers;
for he, to-day that sheds his blood with ii: c,
shall be my brother. sore.
3. any one resembling another in manner, form, or profes-
sion.
- -
129-ko-
he also that is flothful in his work, is brother to him that is
a great waster. proverbs.
i will eat no meat while the world flandeth, lost i make
my brother to offend.
car.
4. brother is used, in theological language, for man in g;-
neral.
br9 ther hoop. m. s. [foom brother ard ...ij
i. the state or quality of being a brother.
this deep disgrace of b, corrhood
touches me deeper than you can imagine. słazrsoare.
finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur *hospeare,
so it be a right to govern, whether you call it suprem: fa-
therhood, or supreme brotherhood, will be all one, provided
we know who has it. locke.
there was a fraternity of men at arms, called the brother-
hood of st. george, erected by parliament, consisting of thir-
teen the most noble and worthy persons.
3. a class of men of the same kind.
he was sometimes so engaged among the wheels, that not
above half the poct appeared ; at other times, he became as
conspicuous as any of the brotherhood. - 4 dison.
br or herly. adj. [from brother.] natural; such as becomes
or beseems a brother.
he was a priest, and looked for a priest's reward; which was
our brotherly love, and the good of our souls and bodies. boon.
though more our money than our cause,
their brotherly assistance draws. denham.
they would not go before the laws, but follow them; obey-
ing their superiors, and embracing one another in brothery
piety and concord. addison.
bro't herly. adv. after the manner of a brother; with kind-
ness and affection.
i speak but brotherly of him ; but should i anatomize him to
thee as he is, i must blush and weep. **-*/peare.
broug ht. [participle passive of bring.]
the turks forsook the walls, and could not be broot on
again to the assault. ancies.
the instances brought by our author are but slender proofs.
looke,
brow. m. s. [bropa, saxon.]
1. the arch of hair over the eye. -
'tis now the hour which all to rest allow,
and sleep sits heavy upon every brow.
2. the forehead.
she could have run, and waddled about;
for even the day before she broke her brow.
so we some antique hero's strength,
learn by his launce's weight and length ;
as these vast beams express the beast,
whose shady brows alive they drest.
3. the general air of the countenance.
then call them to our presence, face to face,
and frowning brow to brow. shakspeare,
though all things foul would bear the brows of grace,
yet grace must look still so. shakespeare.
. the edge of any high place.
the earl, nothing dismayed, came forwards that day unto
a little village, called stoke, and there encamped that night,
upon the brow or banging of a hill. lacon.
on the brow of the hill beyond that city, they were some-
what perplexed by espying the french embassador, with the
king's coach, and others, attending him. jotton.
them with fire, and hostile arms,
fearless assault; and, to the brow of heav'n
pursuing, drive them out from god and bliss. asilion.
to brow. v. a. [from the noun..] to bound; to limit; to
be at the edge of.
tending my flocks hard by i' th' hilly crofts,
that brow this bottom glade. milton.
to brow beat. v. a. [from brow and boat.] to depress with
severe brows, and stern or lofty looks.
it is not for a magistrate to frown upon, and browheat those
who are hearty and exact in their ministry; and, with a grave
nod, to call a resolved zeal, want of prudence. south.
what man will voluntarily expose himself to the imperious
browbeatings and scorns of great men ; l'eorange.
count tariff endeavoured to brow!eat the plaintiff, while
he was speaking; but though he was not so impudent as the
count, he was every whit as sturdy. adijan.
i will not be brow!eaten by the supercilious looks of my
adversaries. - arbuthnot and pope.
br0'w boun d. adj. [from brow and boond.] crowned; having
the head encircled as with a diadem.
davies.
*
dryden,
shakspeare.
waller,
4.
ia
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 308</div><p class="text">b r u
b r u
in that day's feats, -
he prov'd the best man i' th' field, and, for his meed,
was brow-bound with the oak. shakespeare.
browsick, adj. [from brow and sick.] dejected ; hanging the
head.
but yet a gracious influence from you,
may alter nature in our browsick crew. . . . suckling.
brown. adj. [bnun, saxon.] the name of a colour, com-
pounded of black and any other colour.
brown, in high dutch, is called braun; in the netherlands,
bruyun; in french, colour brune; in italian, bruno.
peacham.
i like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a lit-
tle browner. shakespeare.
from whence high ithaca o'erlooks the floods, -
brown with o'ercharging shades and pendent woods. pope.
long untravell'd heaths, -
with desolation brown, he wanders waste. thomson.
brownbill. n. s. [from brown and bill.] the ancient weapon
of the english foot; why it is called brown, i have not disco-
vered; but we now say brown musket from it.
and brownhills, levied in the city,
made bills to pass the grand committee.
brow nish. adj. [from brown.] somewhat brown.
a brownish grey iron-stone, lying in thin strata, is poor, but
runs freely. j/codward.
brow nness. n.s.. [from brown.] a brown colour.
she would confess the contention in her own mind, between
that lovely, indeed most lovely, brownness of musidorus's face,
and this colour of mine. sidney.
brownst udy. m. s. [from brown and study..] gloomy medi-
tations; study in which we direet our thoughts to no certain
o1 nt.
p they live retired, and then they doze away their time in
drowsiness and browns?udies; or, if brisk and active, they lay
themselves out wholly in making common places. norris.
to browse. v. a. [brouser, fr.] to eat branches, or shrubs.
and being down, is trod in the durt
hadibras.
"of cattle, and broused, and sorely hurt. spensor.
-- thy palate then did deign
the roughest berry on the rudest hedge:
yea, like the stag, when snow the pasture sheets,
the barks of trees thou broused?. shakespeare.
to brows e. v. n. to feed : it is used with the particle on.
they have scared away two of my best sheep; if any where
i have them, 'tis by the sea-side, browsing on ivy. shakesp.
a goat, hard pressed, took sanctuary in a vineyard; so soon
as he thought the danger over, he fell presently a browsing upon
the leaves. l'eshrange.
could eat the tender plant, and, by degrees,
browse on the shrubs, and crop the budding trees. blackmore.
the greeks were the descendants of savages, ignorant of
agriculture, and browsing on herbage, like cattle. arbuthnot.
browse. n.s.. [from the verb.] branches, or shrubs, fit for the
food of goats, or other animals.
the greedy lioness the wolf pursues,
the wolf the kid, the wanton kid the brows. dryden.
on that cloud-piercing hill,
plinlimmon, from afar the traveller kens,
astonish'd, how the goats their shrubby brows:
gnaw pendent. philips.
to bruise. v. a. shriser, fr.] to crush or mangle with the
heavy blow of something not edged or pointed; to crush by
any weight; to beat into gross powder; to beat together
coarsely.
fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
bruis’d underneath the yoke of tyranny. shakespeare.
and fix far deeper in his head their stings,
than temporal death shall bruise the victor's heel,
or theirs whom he redeems. milton.
as in old chaos heav'n with earth confus’d,
and stars with rocks together crush'd and bruis’d. waller.
they beat their breasts with many a bruising blow,
till they turn livid, and corrupt the snow. dryden.
bruise. m. s. [from the verb..] a hurt with something blunt
and heavy.
one arm'd with metal, th' other with wood,
this fit for bruis, and that for blood. hudibras.
i since have labour'd
to bind the bruises of a civil war,
and stop the issues of their wasting blood. dryden,
bru’is ewort. m. s. an herb ; the same with comfrey.
bruit. n.s.. [bruit, fr.] rumour ; noise ; report.
a bruit ran from one to the other, that the king was slain.
sidney.
upon some bruits he apprehended a fear, which moved him
to send to sir william herbert to remain his friend.
hayward.
i am not
one that rejoices in the common wreck,
as common bruit doth put it. shakespeare,
to bru it. v. a. [from the noun..] to report; to noise abroad;
to rumour. neither the verb nor the noun are now much
in use.
his death,
being bruited once, took fire and heat away
from the best temper'd courage in his troops. shakespeare.
it was bruited, that i meant nothing less than to go to
guiana. raleigh.
brumal. adj. [irumalis, lat.] belonging to the winter.
about the brumal solstice, it hath been observed, even unto
a proverb, that the sea is calm, and the winds do cease, till
the young ones are excluded, and forsake their nests. brown.
brun, bran, brow n, bour n, burn, are all derived from
the saxon, bonn, bound, brunna, busina; all signifying a
river or brook. gibson.
brunett. n.s. [lrunette, french..] a woman with a brown
complexion.
your fair women therefore thought of this fashion, to in-
sult the olives and the bruneties. afiaison.
bru'nion. m. s. [brignon, fr.] a sort of fruit between a plum
and a peach. trevaux.
brunt. n.s. [bruns, dutch.]
1. shock ; violence.
erona chose rather to bide the brunt of war, than venture
him. sidney.
god, who caus’d a fountain, at thy pray’r,
from the dry ground to spring, thy thirst t'allay
after the brunt of battle. isłch.
faithful ministers are to stand and endure the brunt : a
common soldier may fly, when it is the duty of him that holds
the standard to die upon the place. south.
2. blow ; stroke.
a wicked ambush, which lay hidden long
in the close covert of her guilesul eyen,
thence breaking forth, did thick about me throng,
too feeble it' abide the brant so strong. speoser.
the friendly rug preserv'd the ground,
and headlong knight, from bruise or wound,
like featherbed betwixt a wall
and heavy brunt of cannon-ball. -
brush. n.s.. [brase, fr. from lousous, lat.]
i. an instrument to clean any thing, by rubbing off the dirt or
soil. it is generally made of bristles set in wood.
2. it is used for the larger and stronger pencils used by painters.
whence comes all this rage of wit? this arming all the
pencils and brushes of the town against me stillingfleet.
with a small brush you must smear the glue well upon the
joint of each piece. moxon.
3. a rude assault; a shock; rough treatment; which, by the
same metaphor, we call a souring.
let grow thy finews till their knots be strong,
and tempt not yet the brushes of the war. shakespeare.
it could not be possible, that, upon so little a brush as waller
had sustained, he could not be able to follow and disturb the
king. clarendon.
else when we put it to the push,
they had not giv'n us such a brush.
to brush. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to sweep or rub with a brush. -
if he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing
old signs; he brushes his hat o' morning; what should that
bode 2 - shakespeare.
2. to strike with quickness, as in brushing.
the wrathful beast about him turned light,
and him so rudely passing by, did brush
with his long tail, that horse and man to ground did rush.
spenser's fairy queen.
hudibras.
hudibrar,
has somnus brush'd thy eyelids with his rod dryden.
his son cupavo brush'd the briny flood,
upon his stern a brawny centaur stood. dryden.
high o'er the billows flew the massy load,
and near the ship came thund'ring on the flood,
it almost brush'd the helm. pope,
3. to paint with a brush.
you have commissioned me to paint your shop, and i have
done my best to brush you up like your neighbours. pope.
4. to carry away, by an act like that of brushing ; to sweep.
and from the boughs brush off the evil dew,
and heal the harms of thwarting thunder blew. milton.
the receptacle of waters, into which the mouths of all
rivers must empty themselves, ought to have so spacious a
surface, that as much water may be continually brushed off by
the winds, and exhaled by the sun, as, besides what falls
again, is brought into it by all the rivers. bentley.
5. to move as the brush.
a thousand nights have brush'd their balmy wings
over these eyes. dryden.
to brus h. v. n.
1. to move with haste: a ludicrous word, applied to men.
nor wept his fate, nor cast a pitying eye,
nor took him down, but brush’d regardless by. dryden,
the
5
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 309</div><p class="text">b r u
b u b
so.
also
as w.
stus;:
cline
"...
the french had gather'd all their force,
and william me! them in their way; . -
yet off they truff'd, both foot and horse. prior.
2. to fly over; to skim lightly. - - -
nor love is always of a wicious kind,
but of to virtuous acts inflames the mind,
awakes the sleepy vigor of the soul,
and, brushing o'er, adds motion to the pool. dryden.
‘shek, n.s...[from brush.] he that uses a brush.
*:: henry wotton used to say, that criticks were like
brushers of floblemen's cloaths. bacon.
bru'shwoop. n.s. (from brush and wood. i know not whether
it may not be corrupted from browsewood.] rough, low, close,
shrubby thickets; small wood fit for fire.
itsmokes, and then with trembling breath she blows,
till in a cheerful blaze the flames arose.
with brushwood, and with chips, she strengthens these,
and adds at last the boughs of rotten trees. dryden.
brushy, adjo (from brush.] rough or shaggy, like a brush.
i suspected, that it might have proceeded from some small
unheeded drop of blood, wiped off by the brushy substance of
i. neve, from the knife wherewith it was cut. boyle.
t, bru':tle. v. h. [bnarchan, saxon.] to crackle; to make
a small noise. skinner.
bru'tal, adj. [brutal, french ; from brute.]
1. that which belongs to a brute; that which we have in com-
mon with brutes.
there is no opposing brutal force to the stratagems of hu-
man reason. l’estrange.
2. savage; cruel; inhuman.
the brutal bus’ness of the war
is manag’d by thy dreadful servants care. dryden.
bruta'lity.. n.s.. [brutalite, fr.] savageness; churlishness;
inhumanity.
courage, in an ill-bred man, has the air, and escapes not
the opinion of brutality. locke.
t, brutali'ze. v. n. [brutaliser, fr.] to grow brutal or fa-
wage.
upon being carried to the cape of good hope, he mixed,
in a kind of transport, with his countrymen, brutalized with
them in their habit and manners, and would never again re-
turn to his foreign acquaintance. addison.
t, brutali'ze. v. a. to make brutal or savage.
brutally. adv. [from brutal.] churlishly; inhumanly; cru-
elly,
mrs. bull aimed a knife at john, though john threw a bot-
tie at her head, very brutally indeed. arbuthnot.
brute, adj. [brutus, latin.]
1, senseless; unconscious.
noryet are we so low and base as their atheism would de-
press us; not walking statues of clay, not the sons of brute
earth, whose final inheritance is death and corruption. bentley.
2. savage; irrational; ferine.
even brute animals make use of this artificial way of mak-
ing divers motions, to have several significations to call, warn,
chide, cherish, threaten. holder.
in the promulgation of the mosaick law, if so much as a
brute beast touched the mountain, it was to be struck through
with a dart. south.
3. bestial; in common with beasts.
then to subdue, and quell, through all the earth,
brute violence, and proud tyrannick pow'r. milton.
4. rough; ferocious ; uncivilized.
the brute philosopher, who ne'er has prov’d
the joy of loving, or of being lov’d. pope.
brute. n.s.. [from the adjective..] an irrational creature; a
creature without reason; a savage.
what may this mean language of man pronounc'd
by tongue of brute, and human sense express'd milton.
to those three present impulses, of sense, memory, and
instinet, most, if not all, the sagacities of brutes may be re-
duced. hale.
- brutes may be considered as either aerial, terrestrial, aqua-
tick, or amphibious. i call those aerial which have wings,
wherewith they can support themselves in the air; terrestrial
are those, whose only place of rest is upon the earth; aquatick
are those, whose constant abode is upon the water. locke.
heav'n from all creatures hides the book of fate,
all but the page prescrib'd, this present state;
from brutes what men, from men what spirits know ;
or who could suffer being here below pope.
**te. v. a. [written ill for bruit..] to report.
this, once bruted through the army, filled them all with
heaviness. knolles.
bouteness. n.s.. [from brute.] brutality: a word not now used.
thou dotard vile,
that with thy brutenes, shend'st thy comely age. spenser.
***utify. v. a. [from brute.] to make a man a brute.
9 thou falacious woman i am i then brutified ? ay; feel
"here; i sprout, i bud, i am ripe horn mad, congreve,
*tish. adj. [from brute.]
"o. resembling a beast,
osiris, isis, orus, and their train,
with monstrous shapes and sorceries abus'd
fanatick egypt, and her priests, to seek
their wand'ring gods disguis'd in brutish forms. milton.
2. having the qualities of a brute; rough; savage; ferocious.
brutes, and brutish men, are commonly more able to bear
pain than others. - grew.
3. gross; carnal. -
for thou thyself hast been a libertine,
as sensual as the brutish sting itself. shakoffeare.
after, he has slept himself into some use of himself, by
much ado he staggers to his table again, and there acts over
the same brutish scene. south.
4. ignorant; untaught; uncivilized.
they were not so brutish, that they could be ignorant to
call upon the name of god, hooker.
bru'tishly. adv. [from brutish.] in the manner of a brute,
savagely; irrationally ; grossly.
i am not so diffident of myself, as brutishly to submit to any
man's dictates. king charles.
for a man to found a confident prastice upon a disputable
principle, is brutishly to outrun his reason. south.
bru'tishness. m. s. [from brutish..] brutality; savageness.
all other courage, besides that, is not true valour, but
brutishness. spratt.
bryon y. m. s. [bryonia, latin.] a plant.
bu b. m. s. [a cant word..] strong malt liquor.
or if it be his fate to meet
with folks who have more wealth than wit,
he loves cheap port, and double bub,
and settles in the humdrum club. prizr.
bu bble. n.s.. [bobbel, dutch.]
1. a small bladder of water; a film of water filled with wind.
bubbles are in the form of a hemisphere; air within, and a
little skin of water without: and it seemeth somewhat strange,
that the air should rise so swiftly, while it is in the water, and,
when it cometh to the top, should be stayed by so weak a cover
as that of the bubble is. bacon.
the colours of bubbles, with which children play, are va-
rious, and change their situation variously, without any re-
spect to confine or shadow. newton.
2. any thing which wants solidity and firmness; anything that
is more specious than real. -
the earl of lincoln was induced to participate, not lightly
upon the strength of the proceedings there, which was but a
bubble, but upon letters from the lady margaret. bacon.
then a soldier,
seeking the bubble reputation,
even in the cannon's mouth.
war, he sung, is toil and trouble,
honour but an empty bubble,
fighting still, and still destroying. dryden.
3. a cheat ; a false show.
the nation then too late will find,
direetors promises but wind,
shakespeare,
south-sea at best a mighty bubble. swift.
4. the person cheated.
cease, dearest mother, cease to chide;
gany's a cheat, and i’m a bubble;
yet why this great excess of trouble prior.
he has been my bubble these twenty years, and, to my cer-
tain knowledge, understands no more of his own affairs, than
a child in swaddling clothes. artuthnot.
to bu’bbl.e. v. n. [from the noun..] ,
i. to rise in bubbles.
alas! a crimson river of warm blood,
like to a bubbling fountain stirr'd with wind,
doth rise and fall.
adder's fork, and blindworm's sting,
lizard's leg, and owlet's wing:
for a charm of pow'rful trouble,
like a heilbroth boil and bubble. shakespeare.
still bubble on, and pour forth blood and tears. dryden.
the same spring suffers at some times a very manifest remis-
fion of its heat: at others, as manifest an increase of it; yea,
sometimes to that excess, as to make it boil and bubble with
extreme heat. j/oodward.
2. to run with a gentle noise.
for thee the bubbling springs appear'd to mourn,
and whispering pines made vows for thy return. dryden.
not bubbling fountains to the thirsty swain,
not show’rs to larks, or sunshine to the bee,
are half so charming as thy sight to me. pope.
t, bu’bb. e. v. a. to cheat : a cant word.
he tells me, with great passion, that she has bubbled him out
of his youth; and has drilled him on to five and fifty. addison.
charles mather could not bubble a young beau better with a
toy. arbuthnot.
bu’ebler. m. s. [from bubble.] a cheat. -
what words can suffice to express, how infinitely i esteem
you, above all the great ones in this part of the world; above
all the jews, jobbers, and bubbler. " digby to pope.
3 q. bu’bby.
shakes cara.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 310</div><p class="text">b u c
b u d
bu’bby. m. s. a woman's breast.
foh say they, to see a handsome, brisk, genteel, young
fellow, so much governed by a doating old woman; why don't
you go and suck the bubby p arbuthnot.
bu bo. n. s. (lat. from 32eow, the groin..] that part of the
groin from the bending of the thigh to the scrotum ; and
therefore all tumours in that part are called buboes. quincy.
i suppurated it after the manner of a bubo, opened it, and
endeavoured detersion. i/iseman.
bubonoch le. m. s. [lat. from 32:39, the groin, and zon, a
rupture.] a particular kind of rupture, when the intestines
break down into the groin. 9/inty.
when the intestine, or omentum, falls through the rings
of the abdominal muscles into the groin, it is called hernia in-
guinalis, or, if into the scrotum, scrotalis: these two, though
the first only is properly so called, are known by the name of
bubonocele. sharp.
eu'buk l e. m. s. a red pimple.
his face is all lubukles, and whelks, and knobs, and flames
of fire. shakespeare.
bucani’ers. n.s. a cant word for the privateers, or pirates, of
america.
buccl:llat1, n. m. s. [lucella, a mouthful, lat.) in some
chymical authours, signifies a dividing into large pieces. harris.
buck. m. s. [bauche, germ. suds, or lye.]
1. the liquour in which clothes are washed.
buck / i would i could wash myself of the buck: i warrant
you, buck, and of the season too it shall appear. shakespeare.
2. the clothes washed in the liquour.
of late, not able to travel with her furred pack, she washes
bucks here at home. shakespeare.
buck. m. s. [bwch, welch ; lock, dutch; bouc, fr.] the male
of the fallow deer; the male of rabbets, and other animals.
bucks, goats, and the like are said to be tripping or saliant,
that is, going or leaping. peacham.
to buck. v. a. [from the noun...] to wash clothes.
here is a basket; he may creep in here, and throw foul li-
nen upon him, as if it were going to bucking. shakespeare.
70 buck. v. n. [from the noun..] to copulate as bucks and
does. -
the chief time of setting traps, is in their bucking time.
mortimer,
bu'ckbasket. n.s. the basket in which clothes are carried to
the wash.
they conveyed me into a buckbaset; rammed me in with
foul shirts, foul stockings, and greasy napkins. shakespeare.
bu'ckbean. n.s.. [bock/loonen, dutch..] a plant; a sort of irefoil.
the bitter nauseous plants, as centaury, buckbane, gentian,
of which tea may be made, or wines by infusion. floyer.
bo'cket. n.s.. [baquet, french.]
1. the vessel in which water is drawn out of a well.
now is this golden crown like a deep well,
that owes two buckets, filling one another;
the emptier ever dancing in the air,
the other down unseen, and full of water. shakespeare.
is the sea ever likely to be evaporated by the sun, or to be
emptied with buckets 2 bentley.
2. 'i he vessels in which water is carried, particularly to quench
a fire. -
now streets grow throng'd, and, busy as by day,
some run for buckets to the hallow’d quire;
some cut the pipes, and some the engines play;
and some, more bold, mount ladders to the fire. dryden.
the porringers, that in a row
hung high, and made a glitt’ring show,
to a less noble substance chang'd,
were now but leathern buckets rang'd. swift.
bu’cke.e. n.s.. [bwccl, welch, and the same in the armorick;
boucle, french.]
1. a link of metal, with a tongue or catch made to fasten one
thing to another. -
fair lined slippers for the cold,
with buckles of the purest gold. shakespeare.
the chlamys was a sort of short cloak tied with a buckle,
commonly to the right shoulder. arbuthnot.
three seal rings; which after, melted down,
form'd a vast buckle for his widow's gown. pope.
2. the state of the hair crisped and curled, by being kept long
in the same state.
the greatest beau was dressed in a flaxen periwig; the
wearer of it goes in his own hair at home, and lets his wig lie
in buckle for a whole half year. speciator.
that live long wig, which gorgon' self might own,
eternal buckle takes in parian stone. pope.
t. bu ckle. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to fasten with a buckle.
like saphire, pearl, in rich embroidery,
buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee. shakesp.
france, whose armour conscience buckl’d on,
whom zeal and charity brought to the field. shakesp.
thus, ever, when i buckle on my helmet,
thy fears afflict thee. - philips.
when you carry your master's riding coat, wrap your own
in it, and buckle them up close with a strap. swift.
2. to prepare to do any thing: the metaphor is taken from buck-
ling on the armour,
the saracea, th’s hearing rose amain,
and catching up in haste his three square shield,
and shining helmet, soon him buckled to the field. spensor.
. to join in battle.
the lord gray, captain of the men at arms, was forbidden
to charge, until the foot of the avantguard were buckled with
them in front. hayward.
4. to confine.
how brief the life of man
runs his erring pilgrimage |
that the stretching of a span
buckles in his sum of age.
to bu'ckle. v. m. [bucken, germ.]
1. to bend; to bow.
the wretch, whose fever-weaken'd joints,
like strengthless hinges, buckle under life
impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire
out of his keeper's arms. shakespeare.
2. to buckle to. to apply to ; to attend. see the affive, 2d sense.
now a covetous old crafty knave,
at dead of night, shall raise his son, and cry,
turn out, you rogue; how like a beast you lie;
go buckle to the law. dryden.
this is to be done in children, by trying them, when they
are by laziness unbent, or by avocation bent another way, and
endeavouring to make them buckle to the thing proposed. locke.
3. to buckle with. to engage with ; to encounter; to join
in a close fight, like men locked or buckled together.
for single combat, thou shalt luckle with me. shakespeare.
yet thou, they say, for marriage dost provide;
is this an age to buckle with a bride dryden.
buckler. n.s.. [bwccled, welch ; boutlier, fr.] a shield; a
defensive weapon buckled on the arm.
he took my arms, and while i forc'd my way,
through troops of foes, which did our passage stay;
my buckler o'er my aged father cast,
still fighting, still defending as i past. dryder-
this medal compliments the emperor as the romans did
dictator fabius, when they called him the buckler of rome.
to busckler. v. a. [from the noun..] to support; to defend-
fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, kate =
shakespeare.
i’ll buckler thee against a million. shakespeare-
can oxford, that did ever fence the right,
now buckler falshood with a pedigree ? shakespeare-
bu’cklfr-thcrn. n.s. christ’s-thorn. .
bu'ck mast. m. s. the fruit or mast of the becch tree.
bu'ckram. m. s. [bougran, fr.] a sort of strong linen cloth,
#iffened with gum, used by taylors and staymakers.
i have peppered two of them; two, i am sure, i have paid.
two rogues in buckram suits. shakspeare-
bu'ck r a ms. n.s. the same with wild garlick.
eu'cks horn plantain. m. s. [coronopus, lat. from the form
of the leaf.] a plant. miller-
bu'ckthorn. m. s. [rhamnus, lat. supposed to be so called from a
bucc, saxon, the belly.] a tree that bears a purging berry.
bu'ckw heat. m. s. [bu, kweitz, germ. fog-pyrum, lat..] a
plant. miller.
buco lick, adj. [30.xaaixz, from 3320x3f, a cowherd..] pas-
toral.
bud. m. s. showton, fr.] the first shoot of a plant; a gem.
be as thou was wont to be,
sce as thou wast wont to see:
dian's hudo'er cupid's flower
hath such force and blessed power.
writers say, as the most forward bud
js eaten by the canker ere it blow,
even so by love the young and tender wit
is turn'd to folly, blasting in the bud,
losing his verdure even in the prime.
when you the flow’rs for chloe twine,
why do you to her garland join
the meanest bud that falls from mine * prior.
insects wound the tender buds, with a long hollow trunk, and
deposit an egg in the hole, with a sharp corroding liquor, that
causeth a swelling in the leaf, and closeth the orifice. bentley.
to bud. v. n. [from the noun.]
1. to put forth young shoots, or gems.
bud forth as a rose growing by the brook of the field. eccl.
2. to rise as a gem from the stalk.
there the fruit, that was to be gathered from such a con-
flux, quickly budded out. clarendon.
heav'n gave him all at once, then snatch'd away,
ere mortals all his beauties could survey;
just like that flower that buds and withers in a day. dryd.
tho' lab’ring yokes on their own necks they fear'd,
and felt for budding horns on their fmooth foreheads rear'd.
- dryden's silenus.
3. to
shakspeare.
shakespeare.
re
j.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 311</div><p class="text">a clo
wer,
as.
the fo
- . bloom, or growing. -
3. to o, fair and fresh and sweet, -
wo, or where is thy abode : shakespeare.
1, bud o .."; inoculate; to graff by inserting a bud into
'o. ind of another tree.
of apricocks, the largest is much improved by * ".
emple.
a peach stock. [bouger, fr.] to stir; to move off the
1, budge. v. ".
place: * low word. -
all your prisoners are
in the lime grove, which weatherfends your cell,
not budge till your release. shakespeare.
to:. neer shunn'd the cat, as they did budge
rascals worse than they. shakespeare.
fo th' hadst scorn'd to budge -
for fear. - iiudibras.
bungi, aj, sofuncertain etymology.] surly; stiff; formal.
of olishness of men! that lend their ears -
to those budge doctors of the stoick fur. milton.
bupcs. n.s. the dressed skin or fur of lambs. - ixici.
oposer. n.s. [from the verb.] one that moves or stirs from
his place.
let the first budger die the other's slave,
and the gods doom him after.
bu’dget. n.s.. [b-getto french.] .
1. a bag, such as may be easily carried.
if inkers may have leave to live,
and bear the sowskin budget;
then my account i well may give,
and in the stocks avouch it. shakespeare.
sir robert clifford, in whose bosom, or budget, most of per-
kin's secrets were laid up, was come into england. bacon.
his budget with corruptions cramm'd,
the contributions of the damn'd. swift.
2. it is used for a store, or stock.
it was nature, in fine, that brought off the cat, when the
fox's whole budget of inventions failed him. i’estrange.
buff, n.s.. [from buffalo.]
1. a sort of leather prepared from the skin of the buffalo; used
for waist belts, pouches, and military accoutrements.
a ropy chain of rheums, a visage rough,
deform’d, unfeatur'd, and a skin of buff. dryden.
2. the skins of elks and oxen dressed in oil, and prepared after
the same manner as that of the buffalo.
3. a military coat made of thickleather, so that a blow cannot
easily pierce it.
a fiend, a fairy, pitiless and rough,
a wolf, nay worse, a fellow all in buff. shakespeare.
t buff. v. a.[buffe, fr.] to strike: it is a word not in use.
there was a shock,
to have buff"d out the blood
from ought but a block.
buffalo, n.s. [ital.] a kind of wild ox.
become the unworthy browse
of buffaloes, salt goats, and hungry cows: dryden.
buffet, n.s.. [buffeto, ital.] a blow with the fist; a box
on the ear.
o, i could divide myself, and go to buffets, for moving such
a dish of skimmed milk with so honourable an action. shakesp.
a man that fortune's buffets and rewards
hast ta'en with equal thanks.
go, baff'd coward, lest i run upon thee,
and with one o lay thy structure low. milton.
round his hollow temples, and his ears,
his buckler beats; the sun of neptune stunn'd
with these repeated buffets, quits the ground. dryden.
buffet. n.s.. [buffette, fr.] a kind of cupboard; or set of
shelves, where plate is set out to shew, in a room of entertain-
ment.
the rich buffet well-colour'd serpents grace,
and gaping tritons spew to wash your face. pope.
t. bu'ffet. v. a. [from the noun..] to strike with the hand;
to box; to beat.
why woman, your husband is in his old lunes again; he so
buffets himself on the forehead, crying, peer out, peer out! that
any madness i ever yet beheld, seemed but tameness.
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
ben. johnson.
shakespeare.
our ears are cudgell'd ; not a word of his
but buffets better than a fist of france.
the torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
with lusty finews; throwing it aside.
instantly i plung'd into the sea,
and buffeting the billows to her rescue,
redeem'd her life with half the loss of mine. otway.
to buffet. v. n. to play a boxing-match.
if i might buffet for my love, i could lay on like a butcher.
- shakespeare's henry v.
hoffeter. n. s. [from buffet..]. a boxer; one that buffets.
bu'ffle. n.s, [beuffle, fr.] the same with buffalo; a wild ox.
on. v. n. [from the noun..] to puzzle ; to be at a
01s,
shakespeare.
shakespeare.
this was the utter ruin of that poor, angry, offing, wesi.
meaning mortal, pistorides, who lies equally under the con-
tempt of both parties. swift.
buffleheaded adj. [from buffe and head..] a man with a
large head, like a buffalo ; dull; stupid, foolish.
buß.'...}}}...'...}}*
1. a man,whose profession is to make sport, by low jests and an-
tick postures; a jackpudding.
. no prince would think himself greatly honoured, to have
his proclamation canvassed on a publick stage, and become the
sport of buffoons. i/atti.
2. a man that practises indecent rallery.
it is the nature of drolls and buffoons, to be insolent to those
that will bear it, and slavish to others. l’estrange.
the bold buffoon, whene'er they tread the green,
their motion mimicks, but with jest obscene. garth.
buff0 on ery. m. s. [from buffoon.]
i. the practice or art of a buffoon.
courage, in an ill-bred man, has the air, and escapes not the
opinion of brutality; learning becomes pedantry, and wit buf-
foonery. - locke.
2. low jests; ridiculous pranks; scurrile mirth. dryden places
the accent, improperly, on the first syllable.
where publick ministers encourage buffoonery, it is no won-
der if buffoons set up for publick ministers. l’estrange.
and whilst it lasts, let buffoonery succeed, e
to make us laugh; for never was more need. dryden.
bug. n. s. a stinking inseoł bred in old houshold stuff. in the
following passage, wings are erroneously ascribed to it.
yet let me flap this bug with gilded wings,
this painted child of dirt, which stinks and stings. pope.
bug. } n.s.. [it is derived by some from big, by others from
bu'gbear. w. pug ; bug, in welch, has the same meaning.] a.
frightful object; a walking spectre, imagined to be seen; ge-
nerally now used for a false terrour to frighten babes.
each trembling leaf and whistling wind they hear,
as ghastly bug their hair on end does rear, -
yet both do strive their fearfulness to feign. fairy queen:
sir, spare your threats;
the bug which you would fright me with, i seek. shakes.
hast not slept to-night would he not, naughty man, set
it sleep? a bugbear take him. shakespeare.
we have a horrour for uncouth monsters; but, upon expe-
rience, all these bugs grow familiar and easy to us. l'estrange.
such bugbear thoughts, once got into the tender minds of
children, sink deep, so as not easily, if ever, to be got out
again. lacked
to the world, no bughear is so great,
as want of figure, and a small estate. pope.
bu'gginess. n.s.. [from buggy.] the state of being infected
with bugs.
bu'ggy, adj. [from bug..] abounding with bugs.
bu'gle. }"; [from buzen, sax. to bend, skinner; from
bu'glehorn. s. bucula, lat, a heifer, junius; from bugle, the
bonasus, lye..] a hunting horn.
then took that square an horny bugle small,
which hung adown his side in twisted gold,
and tassels gay. airy queen.
i will have a recheate winded in my forehead, or hang my
bugle in an invisible baldrick. shakespeare.
he gave his bugle born a blast,
that through the woodland echo’d far and wide. tickell.
bu’gle. n.s. a shining bead of black glass.
bugle bracelets, necklace amber,
perfum’d for a lady's chamber. shakespeare.
'tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream, -
that can entame my spirits to your worship. shakespeare.
bu'gle. n. s. [from bugula, lat.] a plant. miller.
bu'gle, n. s. a sort of wild ox. phillip's world of words.
bu’gloss. n.s.. [from buglossum, lat.] the herb ox-tongue.
to build. v. a. preter. i built, i have built. [bilden, dutch.]
1. to raise from the ground ; to make a fabrick, or an edifice.
thou shalt not build an house unto my name. chron.
when usurers tell their gold in the field,
and whores and bawds do churches build.
2. to raise in any laboured form.
when the head-dress was built up in a couple of cones and
spires, which stood so excessively high on the side of the head,
that a woman, who was but a pigmy without her head-dress,
appeared like a colossus upon putting it on. speciator.
3. to raise any thing on a support or foundation.
love built on beauty, soon as beauty, dies;
choose this face, chang'd by no deformities. donne.
i would endeavour to destroy those curious, but groundless
structures, that men have built up of opinions alone. boyle.
to build. v. n. - -
1. to play the archite&amp;t.
to build, to plant, whatever you intend,
to rear the column, or the arch to bend. pope,
2. to depend on ; to rest on.
shakespeare.
" -
—-<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 312</div><p class="text">b u l -
b u l
- r - h
by a man's authority; we here understand the force wo
!his so hath for the assurance of another's mind, *:::::
org. build rather upon the abusing of others, and putting
tricks upon them, than upon foundness of their own proceed-
ings. bacon.
even those who had not tasted of your favours, yet built so
much on the fame of your beneficence, that they bemoaned the
loss of their expectations. - dryden.
this is certainly a much surer way, than to build on the in-
terpretations of an author, who does not consider how the an-
cients used to think. - addison.
booper. m. s. [from build.] he that builds; an architect.
but fore-accounting of makes builders miss; -
they found, they felt, they had no lease of bliss. sidney.
when they, which had seen the beauty of the first temple
built by solomon, beheld how far it excelled the second, which
had not builders of like abilities, the tears of their grieved eyes
the prophets endeavoured, with comforts, to wipe away. hooker.
mark'd out for such an use, as if 'twere meant
to invite the builder, and his choice prevent. denham.
her wings with lengthen’d honour let her spread, , .
and, by her greatness, shew her builder's fame. prior.
building. ‘n, s, ifrom build j a fabrick; an edifice.
thy sumptuous building, and thy wife's attire,
have cost a mass of publick treasury. shakespeare.
view not this spire by measure giv'n
to buildings rais'd by common hands:
that fabrick rises high as heav'n,
whose basis on devotion stands. prior.
among the great variety of ancient coins which i saw at
rome, i could not but take particular notice of such as relate
to any of the tuilding, or statues that are still extant. addison.
built. n.s.. [from build. }
1. the form; the structure.
as is the built, so different is the fight;
their mounting shot is on our fails design'd ;
deep in their hulls our deadly bullets light,
and through the yielding planks a passage find. . dryden.
2. species of building.
there is hardly any country, which has so little shipping as
ireland; the reason must be, the scarcity of timber proper for
this built. temple.
bulb. m. s. [from bulbus, lat.] a round body, or root.
take up your early autumnal tulips, and bulbs, if you will
remove them. evelyn's kalendar.
if we consider the bulb, or ball of the eye, the exteriour
membrane, or coat thereof, is made thick, tough, or strong,
that it is a very hard matter to make a rupture in it. kay.
bulea'ceous. adj. [ballaceus, lat.] the same with bulbous. d.
bull'eous. adj. [from bulb.] containing bulbs; consisting of
bulbs; being round or roundish knobs.
there are of roots, bulbous roots, fibrous roots, and hirsute
roots. and i take it, in the bullous, the sap hasteneth most to
the air and sun. bacon.
set up your traps for vermin, especially amongst your buileus
1 cots. evelyn's kalendar.
their leaves, after they are swelled out, like a bulbous root,
to make the bottle, bend inward, or come again close to the
stalk. ray on the creation.
t, bul.g.e. v. n. [it was originally written bilge ; bilge was the
lower part of the ship, where it swelled out ; from bilic, sax.
a bladder.]
1. to take in water; to founder.
thrice round the ship was tost,
then brig'd at once, and in the deep was lost. dryden.
2. to jut out.
the side, or part of the side of a wall, or any timber that
bulges from its bottom or foundation, is said to batter, or hang
over the foundation. moxon's mechanical exercises.
bu'lifix. m. s. (£42,422, from £85, an ox, and atos, hunger.]
an enormous appetite, attended with fainting, and coldness of
the extremitics. dic7.
bulk. m. s. [bulcke, dutch, the breast, or largest part of a man.]
1. magnitude ; of material substance; mass.
against these forces there were prepared near one hundred
ships; not so great of bulk indeed, but of a more nimble mo-
tion, and more serviceable. bacon's war with spain.
the spaniards and portuguese have ships of great bulk, but
fitter for the merchant than the man of war; for burden than
for battle. raleigh.
though an animal arrives at its full growth, at a certain
age, perhaps it never comes to its full bulk till the last period
of life. - arbuthnot.
2. size ; quantity.
things, or objects, cannot enter into the mind, as they sub-
fift in themselves, and by their own natural bulk, pass into the
apprehension; but they are taken in by their ideas. south.
. the gross; the majority; the main mass.
those very points, in which these wise men disagreed from
the bulk of the people, are points in which they agreed with the
received doctrines of our nature. addison's freeholder,
change in property, through the bulk of a nation, makes
slow marches, and its due power always attends it.
the bulk of the debt must be lessened gradually. swift
4. main fabrick. -
he rais'd a figh so piteous and profound,
that it did seem to shatter all his bulk,
and end his being. - shakspeare,
5. the main part of a ship's cargo; as, to break lulk, is to open
the cargo, t
bulk. n.s.. [from bickke, dan, a beam.] a part of a building
jutting out. &gt;
here stand behind this bulk. straight will he come:
wearthy good rapier base, and put it home. shaksar.
the keeper coming up, found jack with no life in him; he
took down the body, and laid it on a book, and brought out
the rope to the company. arbuthnot's hylory of j. bull.
bulk head. m. s. a partition made across a ship, with boards
whereby one part is divided from another. haro.
bulk in ess. n.s.. [from bulky j greatness of stature, or fize.
wheat, or any other grain, cannot serve instead of money,
because of its bulkiness, and change of its quantity. lois,
bulky. adj. [from bulk.] of great size or stature.
latreus, the bulkies of the double race,
whom the spoil'd arms of slain halesus grace. dryden.
huge telephus, a formidable page,
crics vengeance; and orestes' body rage,
unsatisfy'd with margins closely writ,
foams o'er the covers. dryden.
the manner of sea engagements, which was to bore and
fink the enemy's ships with the rostra, gave bulky and high ships
a great advantage. arbuthnot,
bull. m. s. [bulle, dutch.]
1. the male of black cattle; the male to a cow,
a gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my master's.-
even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull. shak.
bulls are more crisp upon the forehead than cows. bacon.
best age to go to bull, or calve, we hold,
begins at four, and ends at ten years old. may.
2. in the scriptural sense, an enemy powerful, fierce, and violent.
many bulls have compassed me: strong bull of bashan
have beset me round. psalms.
3. one of the twelve signs of the zodiack.
at last from aries rolls the bounteous sun,
and the bright bull receives him. thomson.
4. a letter published by the pope.
a bull is letters called apostolick by the canonists, strength-
ened with a leaden seal, and containing in them the decrees and
commandments of the pope or bishop of rome. ayoff.
there was another sort of ornament wore by the young
nobility, called bulle; round, or of the figure of a heart, hung
about their necks like diamond crosies. those bulke came
afterwards to be hung to the diplomas of the emperors and
popes, from whence they had the name of bulls. arbuthnot,
it was not till after a fresh bull of leo's had declared how in-
flexible the court of rome was in the point of abuses. alterbury.
5. a blunder ; a contradiction.
i confess it is what the english call a bull, in the expres-
son, though the sense be manifest enough. pope's letters.
bull, in composition, generally notes the large size of any
thing, as, bull-head, bul, ush, bull-trout ; and is therefore only
an augmentative syllable, without much reference to its ori-
ginal signification.
bull-baiting. m. s. [from bull and bait..] the sport of baiting
bulls with dogs.
what am i the wiser for knowing that trajan was in the
fifth year of his tribuneship, when he entertained the people
with a horse-race or bull-baiting 2 addison,
bull-beef. n. s. [from bull and beef.] coarse beef; the flesh
of bulls.
they want their porridge and their fat bull-heeves. shases.
bull-beggar. m. s. [this word probably came from the info-
lence of those who begged, or raised money by the pope's bull.]
something terrible; something to fright children with.
these fulminations from the vatican were turned into ridi-
cule; and, as they were called bull-beggars, they were used as
words of scorn and contempt. ayliffe.
bull-calf, n.s.. [from bull and calf.] a he calf; used for a
stupid fellow: a term of reproach.
and, falstaff, you carried your guts away as nimbly, and
roared for mercy, and still ran and roared, as ever i heard a
bull-calf. shakosheart.
bull-dog. m. s. [from bull and dog..] a dog of a particular
form, remarkable for his courage. he is used in baiting the
bull; and this species is so peculiar to britain, that they are
said to degenerate when they are carried to other countries.
all the harmless part of him is that of a bull-d-g; they are
tame no longer than they are not offended. addison,
bul l-finch. n.s. [rubicilla.] a small bird, that has neither
song nor whistle of its own, yet is very apt to learn, if taught
by the mouth. philips', is orid of ward.
the blackbird whistles from the thorny brake,
the mellow bullfinch answers from the groves. thoms”
t i bull-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 313</div><p class="text">b u l
b u mi
!
‘bio-
ho
#: m. s. an inse&amp;t. philips', soorld of hord.
bull-head. n.s.. [from bull and head.]
1. a stupid fellow; a blockhead.
2. the name of a fish.
the miller's thumb, or bull-head, is a fish of no pleasing
shape; it has a head big and flat, much greater than suitable to
its body; a mouth very wide, and usually gaping; he is with-
out teeth, but his lips are very rough, much like a file ; he hath
two fins near to his gills, which are roundish or crested; two
fins under his belly, two on the back, one below the vent, and
the fin of his tail is round. nature hath painted the body of
this fish with whitish, blackish, brownish spots. they are
usually full of spawn all the summer, which swells their vents
in the form of a dug. the bull-head begins to spawn in
april; in winter we know no more what becomes of them
than of ce's or swallows. . i/alton.
3. a little black water vermin. phillips's isorld of sords.
bull-trout. n. s. a large kind of trout.
there is, in northumberland, a trout called a bull trout, of
a much greater length and bigo.css than any in these southern
parts. walton.
bull-we e.d. m. s. the same with knapweed.
bull-wort, or b1s.hops-wer d. m. s. [ammi, lat.] a plant.
bu'll ace. m. s. a wild sour plum.
in october, and the beginning of november, come ser-
vices, medlars, bullaces; roses cut or removed, to come late;
holyoaks, and such like. bacon.
bu'llet. m. s. [boulet, fr.] a round ball of metal, usually
shot out of guns.
as when the devilish iron engine wrought
in deepest hell, and fram’d by furies skill,
with windy nitre and quick sulphur fraught,
and rammed with bullet round, ordain'd to kill. spenser.
gaffer, their leader, desperately fighting amongst the fore-
most of the janizaries, was at once shot with two bullets, and
flain. - knoles.
and as the built, so different is the fight;
their mounting shot is on our sails design'd :
deep in their hulls our deadly bullets light,
and through the yelding planks a passage find. toyot.
bu'l lion. m. s. [billon, fr. j gold or silver in the lump, un-
wrought, uncoined. -
the balance of trade must of necessity be returned in coin
or bullion. bacon.
a second multitude,
with wond’rous art, found out the massy ore,
severing each kind, and scumm'd the bullion dross. milton.
bullion is silver whose workmanship has no value. and
thus foreign coin hath no value here for its stamp, and our coin
is bullion in foreign dominions. - locke.
in every vessel there is stowage for immense treasures, when
the cargo is pure bullion. addison.
bulliot ion. m. s. [from bullio, lat.] the act or state of boiling.
there is to be observed in these dissolutions, which will not
easily incorporate, what the effects are, as the bullition, the
precipitation to the bottom, the ejaculation towards the top,
the suspension in the midst, and the like. bacon.
bu’llock. m. s. [from bull.] a young bull.
why, that's spoken like an honest drover: so they sell bul-
&amp;cks, shakespeare.
- some drove the herds; here the fierce bullock scorns
th’ appointed way, and runs with threat'ning horns. cowley.
until the transportation of cattle into england was prohi-
bited, the quickest trade of ready money here was driven by the
sale of young bullocks. - temple.
bu’lly, n. j. [skinner derives this word from burly, as a cor-
ruption in the pronunciation; which is very probably right: or
from bulky, or bull-yed; which are less probable. may it not
come from bull, the pope's letter, implying the insolence of
those who came invested with authority from the papal court?]
a noisy, blustering, quarrelling fellow: it is generally taken
for a man that has only the appearance of courage.
mine host of the garter —what says my bully rock? speak
scholarly and wisely. shakespeare.
all on a sudden the doors flew open, and in comcs a crew
of roaring bullies, with their wenches, their dogs, and their
bottles. l'e/irange.
'tis so ridic'lous, but so true withal,
a bully cannot sleep without a brawl. dryden.
a scolding hero is, at the worst, a more tolerable character
than a bully in petticoats. addison.
the little man is a bully in his nature, but, when he grows
cholerick, i confine him till his wrath is over. addison.
to bu'll y. v. a. [from the noun..] to overbear with noise or
incilaccs.
prentices, parish clerks, and he&amp;iors meet,
he that is drunk, or bully'd, pays the treat. king.
to bu'lly. v. n. to be noisy and quarrelsome.
bu'lrus h. m. s. [from bull and rush..] a large rush, such as
grows in rivers, without knots; though dryden has given it
the epithet knotty, confounding it, probably, with the reed.
vol. i.
to make fine cages for the nightingale,
and baskets of bulrushes, was my wont. soft”.
all my praises are but as a bulrush cast upon a stream; they
are born by the strength of the current. - dryden.
the edges were with bending offers crown'd;
the #notty bulrush next in order stood,
and all within of reeds a trembling wood. dryder.
bulwark. m. s. [boovercke, dutch ; probably only from
its strength and largeness.]
1. what is now called a bastion.
but him the squire made quickly to retreat,
encountering fierce with single sword in hand,
and 'twixt him and his lord did like a bulwark stand. speos.
- they of repair
their earthen bulwark; gainst the occan flood. fairfax.
we have bulwark; round us;
within our walls are troops enur'd to toil. 4.dison.
2. a fortification.
taking away needless bulwarks, divers were demolished
upon the sea coasts. hayward,
our naval strength is a bulwark to the nation. alaison.
3. a security ; a screen; a shelter.
some making the wars their bulwark, that have before gored
the gentle bosom of peace with pillage and robbery. shaos.
to bu'lwark. v. a. [from the noun.] to fortify; to strength:n
with bulwarks.
and yet no bulwark'd town, or distant coast,
preserves the beauteous youth from being seen. addison.
bum. m. s. [lomme, dutch..] the buttocks; the part on
which we fit.
the wisest aunt telling the saddest tale,
sometime for threefoot stool mistaketh me,
then slip i from her bum, down topples she, shał searc.
this said, he gently rais’d the knight,
and set him on his bum upright.
from dusty shops neglected authors come,
martyrs of pies, and relicks of the bun. dryden.
. the learned sydenham does not doubt,
but profound thought will bring the gout;
and that with bum on couch we lie,
because our reason's soar'd too high. j/–n.
bumba'ili ff. m. s. [this is a corruption of bound bailiff, pro-
nounced by gradual corruption, boun, bun, bum bailiff.] a
bailiff of the meanest kind; one that is employed in arrests.
go, sir andrew, scout me for him at the corner of the
orchard, like a bumbailiff. shakespeare:
bu'mbard. m. s. [wrong written for bombard; which see..] a
great gun; a black jack; a leathern pitcher.
yond same black cloud, yond huge one looks
like a foul bumbard, that would shed his liquor. shakesp.
bu'mbast. n.s.. [falsely written for bombaft ; bombass and bom-
losine being mentioned, with great probability, by junius, as
coming from boom, a tree, and sein, filk; the silk or cotton
of a tree. mr. steevens, with much more probability, deduces
them all from bombycinus.] -
1. a cloth made by sewing one stuff upon another; patchwork.
the usual bumbast of black bits sewed into ermine, our
hudibrar.
english women are made to think very fine. grows .
2. linen stuffed with cotton; stuffing; wadding.
we have received your letters full of love,
and, in our maiden council, rated them
as courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy,
as bumbasl, and as lining to the time. shakespeare.
bump. m. s. [perhaps from bum, as being prominent.] a swell-
ing; a protuberance.
it had upon its brow a bump as big as a young cockrel's
stone; a perilous knock, and it cried bitterly. shakespeare:
not though his teeth are beaten out, his eyes
hang by a string, in bumps his forehead rise. dryden.
to bump. v. a. [from bombus, lat..] to make a loud noise, or
bomb. [see bom.b.] it is applied, i think, only to the bitterm.
then to the water's brink she laid her head,
and as a bittour bumps within a reed,
to thee alone, o lake, she said dryden.
bu’mper. n.s.. [from bump.] a cup filled till the liquor swells
over the brims.
places his delight
all day in playing bumpers, and at night
reels to the bawds. dryden's juvenal.
bu'mpkin. n.s. [this word is of uncertain etymology; hen-
jhaw derives it from pumkin, a kind of worthless gourd, or
melon. this seems harsh ; yet we use the word cabbage-head
in the same sense. bump is used amongst us for a knob, or
lump; may not bumpkin be much the same with clvdpate, log-
gerhead, block, and blockhead..] an awkward heavy rustick;
a country lout.
the poor bumpkin, that had never heard of such delights
before, blessed herself at the change of her condition. l’e/ir.
a heavy bumpkin, taught with daily care,
can never dance three steps with a becoming air. dryden.
in his white cloak the magistrate appears,
the country bumpkin the o liv'ry wears. dryden.
it<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 314</div><p class="text">b u n
it was a favour to admit them to breeding; they might be
ignorant bumpkins and clowns, if they pleased. locke.
bumpkin ly. adj. [from bumpkin..] having the manners or ap-
pearance of a clown ; clownish.
he is a simple, blundering, and yet conceited fellow, who,
aiming at description, and the rustick wonderful, gives an air
of bumpkinly romance to all he tells. clarissa.
bunch. n.s.. [buncker, danish, the crags of the mountains.]
1. a hard lump; a knob.
they will carry their treasures upon the bunches of camels,
to a people that shall not profit them. isaiah, xxx. 6.
he felt the ground, which he had wont to find even and
soft, to be grown hard with little round balls or bunches, like
hard boiled eggs. - boyle.
2. a cluster; many of the same kind growing together.
vines, with clust'ring bunches growing. shakespeare.
titian said, that he knew no better rule for the distribution
of the lights and shadows, than his observation drawn from a
bunch of grapes. dryden.
for thee, large bunches load the bending vine,
and the last blesfings of the year are thine. dryden.
3. a number of things tied together.
and on his arms a bunch of keys he bore. fairy queen.
all i know not what ye call all ; but if i fought not with
fifty of them, i am a lunch of raddish. shakspeare.
ancient janus, with his double face,
and lunch of keys, the porter of the place. dryden.
the mother's bunch of keys, or any thing they cannot hurt
themselves with, serves to divert little children. locke.
4. any thing bound into a knot: as, a bunch of ribon; a tuft.
upon the top of all his lofty crest,
a bunch of hairs discover'd diversly,
with sprinkled pearl and gold full richly drest. spenser.
to bu nc h. v. n. [from the noun..] to swell out in a bunch;
to grow out in protuberances.
it has the resemblance of a champignon before it is opened,
bunching out into a large round knob at one end. j/oodw.
bunchba'ck e.d. adj. [from bunch and back..] having bunches
on the back; crookbacked. -
the day shall come, that thou shalt wish for me,
to help thee curse this pois'nous bunchback'd toad. shakesp.
bu'nchiness. n.s.. [from bunchy..] the quality of being bun-
chy, or growing in bunches.
bu'nc hy. adj. [from bunch..] growing in bunches; having tufts.
he is more especially distinguished from other birds, by his
bunchy tail, and the shortness of his legs. grew.
bu’ndle. m. s. [bynole, sax. from by no.]
i. a number of things bound together.
as to the bundles of petitions in parliament, they were, for
the most part, petitions of private persons. hale.
try, lads, can you this bundle break;—
then bids the youngest of the fix
take up a well-bound heap of sticks. - swift.
2. a roll; anything rolled up.
she carried a great bundle of flanders lace under her arm ;
but finding herself overloaden, she dropped the good man, and
brought away the bundle. speciator.
. to bu'ndle. v. a. [from the noun..] to tie in a bundle; to
tie together: with up,
we ought to put things together, as well as we can, doc-
trinae causa; but, after all, several things will not be bundled
up together, under our terms and ways of speaking. locke.
see how the double nation lies,
like a rich coat with skirts of frize;
as if a man, in making posies,
should bundle thistles up with roses. swift.
bung. n.s.. [bing, welch. j a stopple for a barrel.
after three nights are expired, the next morning pull out
the bung stick, or plug. martimer.
to bung. v. a. [from the noun..] to stop; to close up.
bu’ng hole. n.s.. [from bung and hole.] the hole at which the
barrel is filled, and which is afterwards stopped up.
why may not imagination trace the noble dust of alexan-
der, till he find it stopping a bunghol. 2 shakespeare.
t. bu’ngle. v. n. [see bungle.r.] to perform clumsily.
when men want light,
they make but bungling work. dryden.
letters to me are not seldom opened, and then sealed in a
bungling manner before they come to my hands. swift.
to bu’ngle. v. a. to botch; to manage clumsily; to con-
duct awkwardly : with up.
other devils, that suggest by treasons,
do botch and bungle up damnation,
with patches, colours, and with forms being fetcht
from glist'ring semblances of piety. shakespeare.
they make lame mischief, though they mean it well:
their int’rest is not finely drawn, and hid, "
but searns are coarsely bungled up, and seen. dryden.
bu'ngle. n.s. [from the verb.] a botch; an awkwardness ;
an inaccuracy; a clumsy performance.
errours and bungles are committed, when the matter is in-
apt or contumacious. ray on the creation.
*
bu'ngle.r. m. s. [bwngler, welch; q. bany gler, i.e. the last or
lowest of the profession. davies.] a bad workman; a clumsy
performer ; a man without skill.
painters, at the first, were such bunglers, and so rude, that,
when they drew a cow or a hog, they were fain to write over
the head what it was ; otherwise the beholder knew not what
to make of it. peacham on drawing.
hard features every bungler can command;
to draw true beauty shews a master's hand. dryden.
a bunger thus, who scarce the nail can hit,
with driving wrong will make the pannel split. swift.
bu'nglingly. adv. [from bungling..] clumsily; awkwardly.
to denominate them moniters, they must have had some
system of parts, compounded of solids and fluids, that executed,
though but bunglingly, their peculiar functions. bently.
bunn. m. s. [bunelo, span.] a kind of sweet bread.
thy songs are sweeter to mine ear,
than to the thirsty cattle rivers clear;
or winter porridge to the laboring youth,
or bunns and sugar to the damses's tooth. gay's pastoral.
bun.t. m. s. [corrupted, as skinner thinks, from bent..] a swell-
ing part; an increasing cavity.
‘i he wear is a frith, reaching slopewise through the ooze,
from the land to low water mark, and having in it a bunt or
cod, with an eye hook, where the fish entering, upon the com-
ing back with the ebb, are flopped from issuing out again, for-
saken by the water, and lest dry on the ooze. carew.
to bunt. v. n. [from the noun...] to swell out, as the sail
bunts out.
bu’nter. n.s. a cant word for a woman who picks up rags
about the street; and used, by way of contempt, for any low
vulgar woman. -
bu’nting. m. s. [emberiza alba.] the name of a bird.
l, took this laik for a bunting. shakespeare.
bu’nting. m. s. the stuff of which a ship's colours are made.
bucy. m. s. [boue, or boye, fr. boya, span.] a piece of cork
or wood floating on the water, tied to a weight at the bottom.
the fisherman, that walk upon the beach,
appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark
diminish'd to her cock; her cock a buoy,
almost too small for fight. shakespeare's king lear.
like buoys, that never sink into the flood,
on learning's surface we but lie and nod. pope's dunciad.
to buoy. v. a. [from the noun. the u is mute in both.] to
keep afloat; to bear up.
all art is used to sink episcopacy, and launch presbytery in
england; which was lately buoyed up in scotland, by the like
artifice of a covenant. k. charles.
the water which rises out of the abyss, for the supply of
springs and rivers, would not have stopped at the surface of the
earth, but marched directly up into the atmosphere, wherever
there was heat enough in the air to continue its ascent, and
buoy it up. woodward’s natural hosicry.
to buoy. v. m. to float; to rise by specifick lightness.
rising merit will buoy up at last. pope's effay on crit.
buo'yancy. m. s. [from buoyant..] the quality of floating.
all the winged tribes owe their flight and buoyancy to it.
derham's physico-theology.
buo'yant. adj. [from buoy.] floating; light; that which will not
sink. dryden uses the word, perhaps improperly, for something
that has density enough to hinder a floating body from sinking.
i swom with the tide, and the water under me was buoyant.
dryden.
his once so vivid nerves,
so full of buoyant spirit, now no more -
inspire the course. thomson's autumn.
bur, bour, bor, come from the sax, bun, an inner-chamber,
or place of shade and retirement. gibson's camden.
bur. m. s. [lappa; bourre, fr. is down; the bur being filled with
a soft tomentum, or down.] a rough head of a plant, called
a burdock, which sticks to the hair or clothes.
nothing teems
but hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burs,
losing both beauty and utility. shakespeare's henry v.
hang off, thou cat, thou bur; vile thing, let loose;
or i will shake thee from me like a serpent. shakespeare-
dependents and suitors are always the burs, and sometimes
the briers of favourites. wotton.
whither betake her
from the chill dew, amongst rude burs and thistles. milton.
and where the vales with violets once were crown'd,
now knotty burs and thorns disgrace the ground. dryden.
a fellow stuck like a bur, that there was no shaking him off.
arbuthnot's hylory of john bull.
bu'r bot. n.s. a fish full of prickles. dicf.
bu'r delais. n.s. a sort of grape.
bu'rden. n.s...[byněen, sax. and therefore properly written
burthen. it is supposed to come from burdo, lat. a mule.]
1. a load; something to be carried.
camels have their provender
only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
for sinking under them. shakspeare's coriolanus.
3 it
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 315</div><p class="text">b - u r
b u r
o *
o *
ho
tiss-
o-so
ico.
so
m o
o,
::
so
!--
o
; :
in lading of ships, and may help to shew what
of ...; kinds ...; will o bacon's phys. rem.
tievous or wearisome.
couldst thou support
that burden, heavier than the earth to bear? paradise lost.
none of the things they are to learn, should ever be made a
to them, or imposed on them as a task. locke.
*. giddy, helpless, left alone, -
to all my . burden grown. swift.
"—a la - obsolete.
3. a "...s. a wife once, called æmilia,
that bore thee at a burden two fair sons. shakespeare.
the verse repeated in a song; the bob i. the chorus.
4. at ev'ry close she made, th’ attending throng
reply'd, and bore the burden of the song. dryden's falls.
the quantity that a ship will carry; or the capacity of a ship:
. a ship of a hundred tons burden. -
boots. v. a. [from the noun.] to load; to incumber.
to prain not thyself above thy power. ecclus xiii. 2.
i mean not that other men be eased, and you burdened.
corinthians, viii. 13.
with meats and drinks they had suffic'd,
not burden'd nature. milton.
purposer, n.s. (from burden.] a loader; an oppressour.
bu'rdenou.s. adj, [from burden.]
1. grievous ; oppressive ; wearisome. -
make nojost of that which hath so earnestly pierced me
through, nor let that be light to thee, which to me is so lur-
it is
burden in the
2. something g
densus, sidney.
2. useless; cumbersome. -
to what can i be useful, wherein serve,
but to sit idle on the houshold hearth,
a lurd'nous drone ; to visitants a gaze. milton's agonises.
bu'rdensome, adj. [from burden.] grievous ; troublesome to
be born.
his leisure told him, that his time was come,
and lack of load made his life burdensome.
could i but live till burdensome they prove,
my life would be immortal as my love. dryden's ind. emp.
assistances always attending us, upon the easy condition of
our prayers, and by which the most burdensome duty will be-
come light and easy. rogers.
burpessom en ess. n.s.. [from burdensome.] weight; heavi-
ness; uneasiness to be born.
bu'rdock. m. s. [persolata.] a plant. -
bureau. m. s. [bureau, fr.] a chest of drawers with a wri-
tingboard. it is pronounced as if it were spelt buro.
for not the desk with silver nails,
norbureau of expence,
nor standish well japan'd, avails
to writing of good sense.
burg, n. s. see burrow. -
bu'rgage. m. s. [from burg, or burrow.] a tenure proper to
cities and towns, whereby men of cities or burrows hold their
lands or tenements of the king, or other lord, for a certain year-
ly rent. - cowel.
the gross of the borough is surveyed together in the begin-
ning of the county; but there are some other particular bur-
gages thereof, mentioned under the titles of particular mens
possessions. hale's origin of mankind.
bu'rgamot. n.s.. [bargamotte, fr.]
1. a species of pear.
2. a kind of perfume.
bu'rganet, l n. s. [from bourginote, fr.] a kind of hel-
...} met.
upon his head his glistering burganet,
the which was wrought by wonderous device,
and curiously engraven, he did fit. spenser's muiopotmos.
this day i'll wear aloft my burgonet,
ev’n to affright thee with the view thereof. shakespeare.
i was page to a footman, carrying after him his pike and
burganet. hakewill on providence.
burgeois. n.s.. [bourgeois, fr.]
1. a citizen; a burgess. -
it is a republick itself, under the protection of the eight an-
cient cantons. there are in it an hundred burgeois, and about
a thousand souls. addison on italy.
* a type of a particular sort, probably called so from him who
first used it; as,
milton.
swift.
laugh where we must, be candid where we can,
but vindicate the ways of god to man.
boogess. n.s.. [bourgeois, fr.]
* a citizen; a freeman of a city or corporate town.
* a representative of a town corporate.
the whole case was dispersed by the knights of shires, and
pope.
o oft of towns, through all the veins of the land. isotton.
* *gh. m. s. [see burrow.] a corporate town or borow.
many towns in cornwal, when they were first allowed to
£nd burgesses to the parliament, bore another proportion to
ondon than now; for several of these burghs send two bur-
o so, whereas london itself sends but four. graunt.
*—
bu'roher, n, so [from burgh.] one who has a right to certain
privileges in this or that place. locke.
it irks me, the poor dappled fools,
being native burghers of this desart city,
should in their own confines, with fosked heads,
have their round haunches got'd. shakesp. as you like it.
after the multitude of the common people was dismissed,
and the chief of the burghers sent for, the imperious letter was
read before the better sort of citizens. knolles.
bour. * / [from burgher.] the privilege of a bur-
gner.
bu'rgmaster. see burgomaster.
bu'rolar. n.s. one guilty of the crime of house breaking.
butrglary. m. s. [from burg, a house, and larron, a thief.]
in the natural signification, is nothing but the robbing of
a house : but as it is a term of art, our common lawyers re-
strain it to robbing a house by night, or breaking in with an in-
tent to rob, or do some other felony. the like offence commit-
ted by day, they call house-robbing, by a peculiar name. cowel.
what say you, father ? burglary is but a venial fin among
soldiers. dryden's spanish fyar.
bu'rgomaster. m. s. [from burg and master.] one employed
in the government of a city.
they chuse their councils and burgomasters out of the bur.
geois, as in the other governments of switzerland. ' addison.
burh, is a tower; and from that, a defence or protection; so
cwenburh is a woman ready to assist; cuthbur, eminent for as-
sistance. gibson's camden.
bu'ria l. n.s.. [from to bury.]
1. the aet of burying; sepulture; interment.
nor would we deign him burial of his men.
see my wealthy andrew dock'd in sand,
vailing her high top lower than her ribs,
to kiss her burial. shakespeare's merchant of venice.
your body i sought, and had i found
design'd for burial in your native ground. dryden's zneid.
2. the act of placing anything under earth or water.
we have great lakes, both salt and fresh ; we use them for
burial of some natural bodies; for we find a difference of things
buried in earth, and things buried in water. bacon.
3. the church service for funerals. -
the office of the church is performed by the parish priest,
at the time of interment, if not prohibited unto persons ex-
communicated, and laying violent hands on themselves, by a
rubrick of the burial service. ayliffe's parergon.
bus rier. m. s. [from bury.] he that buries; he that performs
the act of interment,
let one spirit of the first-born cain -
reign in all bosoms, that, each heart being set
on bloody courses, the rude scene may end,
and darkness be the burier of the dead. , shakes). henry iv.
burine. m. s. [french..] a graving tool; a graver.
wit is like the graver's burine upon copper, or the corrod-
ings of aquafortis, which engrave and indent the characters,
that they can never be defaced. government of the tongue.
to burl. v. a. to dress cloth as fullers do. dic7.
burl ace. m. s. [corruptly written for burdelais.] a sort of
rape.
burle'sque, adj. [fr. from burlare, ital, to jest.] jocular;
tending to raise laughter, by unnatural or unsuitable language
or images.
homer, in his character of vulcan and thersites, in his
story of mars and venus, in his behaviour of irus, and in
other passages, has been observed to have lapsed into the lur-
losue character, and to have departed from that serious air,
esiential to the magnificence of an epick poem. addison.
burle’sq9 e. m. s. ludicrous language, or ideas; ridicule.
when a man lays out a twelvemonth on the spots in the
sun, however noble his speculations may be, they are very apt
to fall into burlesque. addison on ancient medals.
to burle’sque. v. a. [from the adjective.] to turn to ridi-
cule.
would homer apply the epithet divine to a modern swine-
herd if not, it is an evidence, that eumeus was a man of
consequence; otherwise homer would burlesque his own poetry.
broome's notes on the odissy.
bu’r liness. n.s.. [from burly.] bulk; bluster.
bu'rly. adj. [junius has no etymology; skinner imagines it
to come from boorlike, clownish.j great of stature; great of
size; bulky; tumid.
steel, if thou turn thine edge, or cut not out the bury boned
clown in chines of beef, ere thou sleep in thy sheath, i beseech
shakesp.
jove, that thou mayst be turned into hobnails. shakespeare.
it was the orator's own burly way of nonsense. cowley.
away with all your carthaginian state,
let vanquish'd hannibal without doors wait,
too burly and too big to pass my narrow gate. dryden.
her husband, being a very burly man, she thought it would
be less trouble for her to bring away little cupid. addison.
to burn. v. a. preterite and participle burned, or burnt.
[bennan, saxon.] - --
they
1. to consume with fire.<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 316</div><p class="text">b u r
they burnt jericho with fire.
joshua.
the fire burneth the wood. psalms.
altar of syrian mode, whereon to lurn
his odious offerings. milton.
that where she fed his amorous desires
with soft complaints, and felt his hottest fires,
there other flames might waste his earthly part,
and burn his limbs where love had burn’d his heart. drydon.
a fleshy excrescence, becoming exceeding hard, is supposed
to demand extirpation, by burning away the induration, or
amputating. sharp's surgery.
2. to wound or hurt with fire or heat.--
hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound
for wound, stripe for stripe. exodus, xxi. 25.
3. to exert the qualities of heat, as by drying or scorching.
o that i could but weep, to vent my passion
but this dry sorrow lurns up all my tears.
to burn. v. n.
1. to be on fire ; to be kindled.
a fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame
burneth ; the land is as the garden of eden before them, and
behind them a desolate wilderne's. joel.
the mount burred with fire. exodus.
o coward conscience how dost thou afflict me *
the light barns blue—ls it not dead midnight
cold tren.bling drcps stand on my trembling
dryden.
flesh.
shakespeare.
2. to shine; to sparkle.
the barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne,
burnt on the water. shakespeare.
on prince, oh! wherefore burn your eyes? and why
is your sweet temper turn'd to fury : rowe.
3. to be inflamed with passion, or desire
when i burnt in desire to question them farther, they made
themselves air, into which they vanished. shakespeare.
tranio, i burn, i pine, i perish, tranio,
if i atchieve not this young modest girl' shakes eare.
in raleigh mark their every glory mix’d ;
raleigh, the scourge of spain s whose breast with all
the sage, the patriot, and the hero burn'd. thomson.
4. to act with destructive violence, used of the passions.
shall thy wrath born like fire?
5. to be in a state of destructive commotion.
the nations bleed where'er her steps she turns,
the groan still deepens and the combat burns.
6. it is used particularly of love.
she hurns, she raves, she dies, ’tis true,
but burns, and raves and dies for you. addison.
burning. adj. [from the participle..] vehement; powerful.
these things sting him
so venomously, that burning shame detains him
psalms.
pope.
from his cordelia. shakespeare.
i had a glimpse of him; but he shot by me
like a young hound upon a burning scent. dryden.
burn. m. s. [from the verb.] a hurt caused by fire.
we see the phlegm of vitriol is a very effectual remedy
against burns. boyle.
bus rner. m. s. [from burn..] a person that burns anything.
bu'rnet. n.s. [pimpinella, lat.] the name of a plant.
the even mead that erst brought sweetly forth,
the freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover. shakesp.
bu'rning. m. s. [from burn..] fire; flame; state of inflam-
mation.
the mind surely, of itself, can feel none of the burnings of
a fever. south.
in liquid burnings, or on dry to dwell,
is all the sad variety of hell. dryden.
bu’rning-g lass. n.s.. [from burning and glas...] a glass which
collects the rays of the sun into a narrow compass, and so in-
creases their force.
the appetite of her eye did seem to scorch me up like a
burning glass. shakespeare.
love is of the nature of a burning-glass, which, kept still in
one place, fireth ; changed often, it doth nothing. suckling.
o diadem, thou centre of ambition,
vv here all its different lines are reconciled,
as if thou wert the burning gloss of glory! dryden.
to lut&amp;nish. v. a. [larnir, fr. j. to polish ; to give a gloss
to.
mislike me not for my complexion,
the shadow’d livery of the burnish'd sun,
to whom i am a neighbour, and near bred. shakspeare.
make a piate of them, and burnish it as they do iron. bacon.
the frame of burnish'd steel, that cast a glare
from far, and seem'd to thaw the freezing air.
to bu'rnish. v. m. to grow bright or glossy.
i’ve seen a snake in human form,
all stain'd with infamy and vice,
leap from the dunghill in a trice,
burnish, and make a gawdy show,
become a gen'ral, peer, and beau. swift.
7, bu'rnish, v, n. [of uncertain etymology.] to grow ; to
spread out.
dryden.
this they could do, while saturn fill'd the throne,
ere juno burnish'd, or young jove was grown. dryder.
to shoot, and spread, and burnish into man. dryden.
mrs. primley’s great belly she may lace down before, but
it burnish's on her hips. congreve.
bu'rnis her. m. s. [from burnish.]
1. the person that burnishes or polishes. -
2. the tool with which bookbinders give a gloss to the leaves
of books: it is commonly a dog's tooth set in a stick.
burnt. particip, pass. of burn : applied to liquours, it means
made hot.
i find it very difficult to know,
who, to refresh th’ attendants to a grave, -
burnt claret first, or naples bisket gave. king.
burr. m. s. the lobe or lap of the ear. dicf.
burr pump. [in a ship.) a pump by the side of a ship, into
which a staff seven or eight feet long is put ; having a burr or
knob of wood at the end, which is drawn up by a rope fasten-
ed to the middle of it, called also a bilge pump. harris.
bu’rr as pipe. [with surgeons.] an instrument or vessel used
to keep corroding powders in, as vitriol, precipitate. harris.
bu'rrel. m. s. a sort of pear, otherwise called the red butter
pear, from its smooth, delicious, and soft pulp. philips.
bu'rrel fy. [from bourreler, fr. to execute, to torture.] an
infect, called also oxfy, gadbee, or breeze. dici.
bu'rrel shot [from bourreler, to execute, and shot..] in gun-
nery, small bullets, nails, stones, pieces of old iron, &amp;c. put
into cases, to be discharged out of the ordnance; a sort of
cast shot. harris.
bu'rrock. m. s. a small wear or dam, where wheels are laid
in a river for catching of fish. philips.
bu'rrow, berg, burg, burgh. n.s. [derived from the sax-
on bung, byro, a city, tower, or castle. gibson’s camden.]
1. a corporate town, that is not a city, but such as sends bur-
gests to the parliament. all places that, in former days, were
called boroughs, were such as were fenced or fortified. cowel.
king of england shalt thou be proclaim'd
in ev’ry burrow, as we pass along. shakespeare.
possession of land was the original right of election among
the commons; and lurrows were entitled to sit as they were
possessed of certain tracts. temple.
2. the holes, made in the ground by conies.
when they shall see his crest up again, and the man in
blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies after rain,
and revel all with him. shakespeare.
to burrow. v. n. [from the noun..] to makes holes in the
ground ; to mine, as conies or rabbits.
some strew and among their corn, which they say, pre-
vents mice and rats burrowing in it; because of its falling into
their ears. a1:rtimer.
little sinuses would form, and burrow underneath. sharp.
bu'rsar. n.s.. [bursarius, lat.]
1. the treasurer of a college.
2. students sent as exhibitioners to the universities in scotland
by each presbytery, from whom they have a small yearly al-
lowance for four years.
burse. n. s. [...ourse, fr. bursa, lat. a purse; or from lyr/a,
lat. the exchange of carthage.] an exchange where mer–
chants meet, and shops are kept; so called, because the sign of
the purse was anciently set over such a place; the exchange in
the strand was termed britain's burse by james i. phillf.
to burst. v. n. i buy!; i have burs, or buylen. [bun; tın,
saxon, j
1. to break, or fly open ; to suffer a violent disruption.
so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall
burst out with new wine. prov. iii. 1 o.
it is ready to burst like new bottles. joo.
th’ egg that soon
burs?ing with kindly rupture, forth disclos'd
the callow young. - milton.
2. to fly asunder.
yet am i thankful; if my heart were great,
'twould burst at this. -
3. to break away 5 to spring.
you burst, ah cruel from my arms,
and swiftly shoot along the mall,
or softly glide by the canal.
4. to come suddenly.
shakspeare.
pope.
- a resolved villain,
whose bowels suddenly burst out; the king
yet speaks, and, peradventure, may recover.
if the worlds
in worlds inclos'd shou'd on his scnses bars,
he wou'd abhorrent turn.
5. to come with violcnce.
well didst thou, richard, to suppress thy voice;
for had the passions of thy heart burs? out,
i fear, we should have seen decypher'd there
more ranc’rous spight. shakes care.
where is the notable passage over the river euphrates, bar/-
ing out by the vallies of the mountain antitaurus; from whence
the plains of mesopotamia, then part of the persian kingdom,
begin to open themselves. anolics.
2. young
shakespeare.
thomson.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 317</div><p class="text">b u s
b u s
n sco.
year,
from ,
where:
se the o
excho
\, p.
o, so
ption,
y tu.
poio
-
young spring protrudes the bursling gems. thomson.
6- to begin an action violently or suddenly.
she burs' into tears, and wrung her hands. arbuthnot.
2 o bur st. v. a. to break suddenly; to make a quick and
violent disruption.
my breast i'll burs? with straining of my courage,
and from my shoulders crack my arms asunder,
but i will chastise this high-minded strumpet. shakesp.
he fasten’d on my neck, and bellow'd out,
as if he would burst heav'n. shakespeare.
i will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy
bonds. jer. xxx. 8.
moses saith also, the fountains of the great abyss were burst
asunder, to make the deluge; and what means this abyss, and
the bursting of it, if restrained to judea what appearance is
there of this disruption there burnet's theory.
if the juices of an animal body were, so as by the mixture
of the opposites, to cause an ebullition, they would burst the
vessels. arbuthnot.
b u r st. m. s. [from the verb.] a sudden disruption; a sudden
and violent action of any kind.
since i was man,
such sheets of fire, such burst of horrid thunder,
such groans of roaring wind and rain, i never
remember to have heard, shakespeare.
down they came, and drew
the whole roof after them, with burst of thunder,
upon the heads of all. milton.
imprison'd fires, in the close dungeons pent,
roar to get loose, and struggle for a vent,
eating their way, and undermining all,
till with a mighty burst whole mountains fall. addison.
rurst. ! particip. adj. [from burst..] diseased with a hernia,
bu’rst en. s. or rupture.
bu'r's tenness. n. s. [from burst.] a rupture, or hernia.
bu’rs.two rt. m. s. [from burst and wort; hermiaria, latin.]
an herb good against ruptures. dic?.
bus rt. n.s. a flat fish of the turbot kind.
to bu'rthen. v. a.
bu'rthen. m. s.
sacred to ridicule his whole life long,
and the sad burthen of some merry song. pope.
bu'rton. n.s. [in a ship.] a small tackle to be fastened any
where at pleasure, consisting of two single pullies, for hoisting
small things in or out. phillips.
bury. n.s.. [from bung, sax.] a dwelling-place; a ter-
mination still added to the names of several places; as, al-
dermanbury, st. edmond's bury; sometimes written bery. phil.
bu’ry. m. s. [corrupted from borough.]
it is his nature to dig himself buries, as the coney doth ;
which he doth with very great celerity. grew.
to bu'ry. v. a. [bynī;ean, saxon.]
1. to inter; to put into a grave.
when he lies along,
after your way his tale pronounc'd, shall bury
his reasons with his body. shakespeare,
2. to inter, with the rites and ceremonies of sepulture.
slave, thou hast slain me !
if ever thou wilt thrive, bary my body. shakespeare.
if you have kindness left, there see me laid;
to bury decently the injur'd maid,
is all the favour. jwaller.
3. to conceal ; to hide.
this is the way to make the city flat,
and bury all, which yet distinctly ranges,
in heaps and piles of ruin. shakespeare.
4. to place one thing within another.
a tearing groan did break
the name of antony; it was divided
between her heart and lips; she render'd life,
thy name so bury'd in her. shakespeare.
bu'ry ing pla ce. n.s. a place appointed for the sepulture of
dead bodies.
the place was formerly a church-yard, and has still several
marks in it of graves and burying-places, speciator.
bush. n. s. socis, fr. j
1. a thick ilirub.
eft through the thick they heard one rudely rush,
with noise whereof, he, from his lofty steed,
down fell to ground, and crept into a bush,
to hide his coward head from dying dread. fairy queen.
the poller, and exacter of fees, justifies the resemblance of
the courts of justice to the bush, whereunto while the sheep
flies for defence from the weather, he is sure to lose part of the
fleece. bacon's essays.
her heart was that strange bush, whose sacred fire,
religion did not consume, but inspire
such piety, so chaste use of god's day,
that what we turn to feast, she turn'd to pray. donne.
with such a care,
as roses from their stalks we tear,
when we would still prefer them new,
and fresh as on the bush they grew. js aller.
} see burden.
vol. i.
the sacred ground
shall weeds and pois'nous plants resuse to bear;
each common bush shall syrian roses wear? i}ryden.
2. a bough of a tree fixed up at a door, to shew that liquours
are sold there. -
if it be true, that good wine needs no lush, 'tis true that a
good play needs no epilogue. shakos' care.
to bush. v. n. [from the noun..] to grow thick.
- the roses bushing round
about her glow'd, half stooping to support
each flow'r of tender stalk. milton.
a gushing fountain broke
around it, and above, for ever green, -
the bushing alders form'd a shady scene. pope's oosy.
bu's hel. m. s. [beisseau, fr. buffollus, low lat.]
1. a measure containing eight gallons; a strike.
his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two boshel, of
chaff; you shall i p'all day cre you find them ; and when
you have them, they are not worth the search. shakespeare.
2. it is used, in common language, indefinitely for a large quan-
tit v.
'the worthies of antiquity bought the rarest pictures with
bushels of gold, without counting the weight or the number
of pieces. dryden.
3. bushels of a cart-wheel. irons within the hole of the nave, to
preserve it from wearing. [from bouche, fr. a mouth..] dic.
bu’s hiness. m. s. [from bushy.] the quality of being bushy.
bu's hment. m. s. [from bush. j. a thicket; a cluster of bushes.
princes thought how they might discharge the earth of
woods, briars, bushments, and waters, to make it more habi-
table and fertile. raleigh.
bu's hy. adj. [from bush.] -
1. thick; full of small branches, not high.
the gentle shepherd sat beside a spring,
all in the shadow of a buffy brier. spensor.
generally the cutting away of boughs and suckers at the
root and body, doth make trees grow high ; and, contrari-
wise, the polling and cutting of the top, make them spread
and grow bushy. bacon.
2. thick like a bush.
statues of this god, with a thick busy beard, are still many
of them extant in rome. addison.
3. full of bushes. -
the kids with pleasure browse the bushy plain ;
the show’rs are grateful to the swelling grain. dryden.
bu's iless. adj. [from busy..] at leisure; without business;
unemployed.
the sweet thoughts do even refresh my labour,
most busies, when i do it. shakespeare.
bu’s ily. adv. [from busy.]
1. with an air of importance; with an air of hurry.
2. curiously; importunately.
or if too busily they will enquire
into a victory, which we disdain, z
then let them know, the belgians did retire,
before the patron saint of injur'd spain. dryden.
bu's in ess. n.s.. [from busy.]
1. employment; multiplicity of affairs.
must business thee from hence remove
oh that's the worst disease of love. donne.
2. an affair. in this sense it has the plural.
bestow
your needful counsel to our businesses,
which crave the instant use. shakes care.
3. the subject of business; the affair or object that engages the
" care. -
you are so much the business of our souls, that while you
are in fight we can neither look nor think on any else; there
are no eyes for other beauties. dryden.
the great business of the senses, being to take notice of what
hurts or advantages the body. locke.
4. serious engagement, in opposition to trivial transgetions.
i never knew one, who made it his busines to lash the faults
of other writers, that was not guilty of greater himself.
addison.
he had bosons; enough upon his hands, and was only a poet
by accident. - prior.
when diversion is made the busines, and study of life, though
the aetions chosen be in themselves innocent, the excess will
render them criminal. rogers.
5. right of action.
what busines; has a tortoise among the clouds? l’e?range.
6. a point; a matter of question ; something to be examined
or considered.
fitness to govern, is a perplexed busines ; some men, some
nations, excel in the one ability, some in the other. bacon.
7. something to be transacted.
they were far from the zidonians, and had no busines with
any one. - judges.
8. something required to be done.
to those people that dwell under or near the equator, this
spring would be most pestilent; as for those countries that
are nearer the poles, in which number are our own, and the
3 s most<br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""><br xmlns=""></p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 318</div><p class="text">b u s
b u t
most considerable nations of the world, a perpetual spring will
not do their business; they must have longer days, a nearer
approach of the sun. - bently.
9. to do one’s business. to kill, destroy, or ruin him.
busk. n.s.. [busque, fr.] a piece of steel or whalebone, worn
by women to strengthen their stays.
off with that happy bus, which i envy,
that still can be, and still can stand so nigh.
bu's kin. m. s. [brosofen, dutch.]
1. a kind of half boot; a shoe which comes to the midleg.
the foot was dressed in a short pair of velvet buskins; in
fome places open, to shew the fairness of the skin. sidney.
sometimes diana he her takes to be,
but misleth bow, and shafts, and tuskins to her knee.
- spensor.
there is a kind of rusticity in all those pompous verses;
somewhat of a holiday shepherd strutting in his country bus-
kins. ) dryden.
2. a kind of high shoe wore by the addeut actors of tragedy, to
raise their stature.
great fletcher never treads in buskins here,
donne.
no greater johnson dares in socks appear.
in her best light the comick muse appears,
when she, with borrow’d pride, the buskin wears. smith.
bu's kin ed. adj. [from buskin, j drelied in buskins.
or what, though rare, of later age,
ennobl’d hath the busin'd stage : milton.
, here, arm'd with silver bows, in early dawn,
pote.
her busin’d virgins trac'd the dewy lawn. s
bu's ky. adj. [written more properly by milton, bosy. see
bosky.] woody; shaded with woods ; overgrown with
trees.
how bloodily the sun begins to peer
above yon busky hill
buss. m. s. [bus, the mouth, irish ; bouche, fr.]
1. a kiss; a salute with the lips.
thou dost give me flattering buses.—by my troth, i kiss
thee with a most constant heart. shakespeare.
some squire perhaps you take delight to rack,
who visits with a gun, presents with birds,
then gives a smacking bus.
2. a boat for fishing. [buse, german.]
if the king would enter towards building such a number of
boats and buffes, as each company could easily manage, it would
be an encouragement both of honour and advantage. temple.
to buss. v. a. [from the noun..] to kiss; to salute with the
lips.
shakes eare.
pope.
yonder walls, that partly front your town,
yond towers, whose wanton tops do bus; the clouds,
must kiss their feet. shakes eare.
go to them with this bonnet in thy hand,
thy knee busing the stones; for in such business,
a&amp;tion is eloquence. - shakeshcare.
bust. m. s. [busio, ital.] a statue representing a man to his
breast.
agrippa, or caligula, is a common coin, but a very extra-
ordinary buff; and a tiberius, a rare coin, but a common bus.
addison on jiay.
ambition figh’d : she found it vain to trust
the faithless column, and the crumbling bush.
bu's tard. m. s. [bislande, fr.] a wild turkey.
his sacrifices were pheoicopters, peacocks, byłards, turkeys,
pheasants ; and all those were daily offered. hakewll.
to bu's tl.e. v. n. [of uncertain etymology; perhaps from busy.]
to be busy; to stir; to be active.
pope.
come, busie, bustle—caparison my horse. shakespeare.
god take king edward to his mercy,
and leave the world for me to buyile in. shakespeare.
sir henry vane was a busy and busiling man, who had credit
cnough to do his business in all places. clarend.n.
a poor abject worm,
that crawl'd awhile upon a busiling world,
and now am trampied to my dust again. souther me.
ye sov’reign lords, who sit like gods in state,
a wing the world, and busiling to be great granville.
bu's rie. n.s.. [from the verb...] a tumult; a hurry; a com-
bustion.
wisdom's self
oft seeks to sweet retired solitude:
she plumes her feathers, and lets grow her wings,
that, in the various bylle of resort,
vw'ere all too rufi'd. - a si'oon.
this is the creature that pretends to knowledge, and that
makes such a noise and bus, le for opinions. glanville.
such a doctrine made a strange to/ise and disturbance in the
world, which then sate warm and easy in a free enjoyment of
their justs. - south.
if the count had given them a pot of ale after it, all would
have been well, without any of this busile. speciator.
bu’s t ler. m. s. [from busile.] an active stirring man.
busy, adj. [byroan, sax. it is pronounced as bij, or bizzy..]
1. employed with earnestness. -
*
dryden.
my mistress sends you word, that she is bus, and cannot
conne. shakespeare.
2. bustling; active ; meddling.
the next thing which she waking looks upon,
on meddling monkey, or on busy ape,
she shall pursue it with the soul of love. shakespeare.
thus busy pow'r is working day and night;
for when the outward senses rest do take,
a thousand dreams, fantastical and light,
with flutt’ring wings, do keep her still awake.
the coming spring would first appear,
and all this place with roses strow,
if busy feet would let them grow. jolier.
all written since that time, seem to have little more than
events we are glad to know, or the controversy of opinions,
wherein the busy world has been so much employed. templ.
reiigious motives and instincts are so busy in the heart of
every reasonable creature, that no man would hope to govern a
society, without regard to those principles. addison.
3. troublesome ; vexatiously importunate or intensive.
the christians, sometimes valiantly receiving the enemy, and
sonictimes charging them again, repulsed the proud enemy, still
busy with them. - knolles's history of the york.
79 bussy. v. a. [from the noun..] to employ; to engage ; to
make or keep busy.
he in great passion all this while did dwell,
more busing his quick eyes her face to view,
than his dull ears to hear what she did tell. fairy queen.
the pleasure which i took at my friend's pleasure herein,
idly bused me thus to express the same. carew's survey.
be it thy course to busy giddy minds
with foreign quarrels. shakespeare.
while they were busied to lay the foundations, their build-
ings were overthrown by an earthquake, and many thousands
of the jews were overwhelmed. raleigh.
the points which busied the devotion of the first ages, and
the curiosity of the latter. decay of piety.
the ideas it is losed about, should be natural and congenial
ones, which it had in itself. zacee.
the learning and disputes of the schools have been much
losed about genus and species. locoe.
for the rest, it must be owned, he does not lus himself, by
entering deep into any party, but rather spends his time in acts
of hospitality. swift.
busybopy. m. s. [from busy and body.) a vain, meddling, fan-
tastical person.
going from house to house, tatlers and busybodies, are the
canker and rust of idleness, as idleness is the rust of time.
taylor.
busybodies and intermeddlers are a dangerous sort of people
to have to do withal. l’e//range.
she is well acquainted with all the favourite servants, 4 off-
bodies, dependants, and poor relations of all persons of condi-
tion in the whole town. spectator.
but. conjunct. [bute, butan, saxon.]
1. except.
an emission of immateriate virtues we are a little doubtful
to propound, it is so prodigious: but that it is so constantly
davies.
avouched by many. bacon.
who can it be, ye gods ! but perjur’d lycon
who can inspire such storms of rage, but lycon
where has my sword left one so black, but lycon 2 smith.
your poem hath been printed, and we have no objection out
the obscurity of several pallages, by our ignorance in facts and
persons. swift.
2. except then ; had it not been that: in this sense we now
write out that. see sense 1 1.
and but infirmity,
which waits upon worn times, hath something seiz'd
his wish'd ability, he had himself
the lands and waters measur’d. shakspeare.
3. yet ; nevertheless. it sometimes only enforces yet.
then let him speak, and any that shall stand without shall
hear his voice plainly; but yet made extreme sharp and exile,
like the voice of puppets: and yet the articulate founds of the
words will not be confounded. bacon.
our wants are many, and grievous to be born, but quite of
another kind." - swift.
4. the particle which introduces the minor of a syllogism; now.
if there be a liberty and possibility for a man to kili himself
to-day, then it is not absolutely necessary that he shall live till
to-morrow ; but there is such a liberty, therefore no such ne-
cessity. bramhall against hobbcs.
god will one time or another make a difference between the
good and the evil. but there is little or no difference made
in this world : therefore there must be another world, wherein
this difference shall be made. //atts's lagick.
5. only ; nothing more than.
if my offence be of mortal kind,
that not my service, past or present sorrows,
can ransom me into his love again ;
but to know so, must be my benefit. sasoff care.
- what
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 319</div><p class="text">b u t
b u t
o
what nymph soc'er his voice but hears, - -
will be my rival, though she have but ears. ben. 7zhnson.
no, aurengzebe, you merit all my heart,
and i’m too noble but to give a part. dryden.
did but men consider the true notion of god, he would ap-
ear to be full of goodness. tillotson.
if we do but put virtue and vice in equal circumstances, the
advantages of ease and pleasure will be found to be on the side
of religion. tillotson.
the mischiefs or harms that come by play, inadvertency, or
ignorance are not at all, or but very gently, to be taken notice
of. locke on education.
if a reader examines horace's art of poetry, he will find but
very few precepts in it, which he may not meet with in ari-
{totle. addison.
prepar'd i stand: he was but born to try -
the lot of man, to suffer and to die. pope.
6. than.
the full moon was no sooner up, and shining in all its
brightncss, but he opened the gate of paradise. guardian.
7. but that ; without this consequence that.
frosts that constrain the ground,
do seldom their usurping power withdraw,
but raging floods pursue their basty hand. dryden.
8. otherwise than that.
it cannot be but nature hath some director, of infinite
power, to guide her in all her ways. hooker.
who shall believe,
but you misuse the reverence of your place : shakespeare.
9. not more than ; even.
a genius so elevated and unconfined as mr. cowley's, was
but necessary to make pindar speak english. dryden.
i c. by any other means than.
beroe but now i left; whom, pin'd with pain,
her age and anguish from these rites detain. dryden.
it is evident, in the instance i gave but now, the conscious-
ness went along. locke.
out of that will i cause those of cyprus to mutiny: whose
qualification shall come into no true taste again, but by trans-
planting of cassio. shakespeare.
11. if it were not for this ; that; if it were not that. obsolete.
- believe me, i had rather have lost my purse
full of cruzades. and, but my nobie moor
is true of mind, and made of no such baseness,
as jealous creatures are, it were enough
to put him to ill-thinking.
i here do give thee that with all my heart,
which but thou hast already, with all my heart
i would keep from thce. shakespeare.
12. however; howbeit ; a word of indeterminate connection.
i do not doubt but i have been to blame;
but, to pursue the end for which i came,
unite your subjecis first, then let us go,
and pour their common rage upon the foe. dryden.
13. it is used after no doubt, no question, and such words, and fig-
nifies the same with that. it sometimes is joined with that.
they made no account, but that the navy should be absolute-
ly master of the seas. bacon.
i fancied to myself a kind of ease in the change of the pa-
roxysm; never suspecting but that the humour would have
wasted its ls. - dryden.
there is no question but the king of spain will reform most
of the abuscs. - addison.
14. that. this seems no proper sense in this place.
it is not therefore impossible, but i may alter the complexion
of my play, to restore myself into the good graces of my fair
• *
shakespeare.
criticks. dryden.
15. otherwise than. obsolete.
i should sin -
to think but nobly of my grandmother. shakespeare.
16. a particle by which the meaning of the foregoing sentence
is bounded or restrained ; only.
thus fights ulysis, thus his fame extends,
a formidable man, but to his friends. drydon.
17. a particle of objection; yet it may be objected : it has some-
times yet with it.
but yet, madam—
i do not like but yet ; it does allay
the good precedence ; fie upon but yet /
bot yet is as a jaylour, to bring forth
some monstrous malefactor. shakespeare.
must the heart then have beco formed and constituted, be-
fore the blood was in being but here again, the substance of
the heart itself is most certainly made and nourished by the
blood, which is conveyed to it by the coronary arteries. bentley.
#8. but for; without ; had not this been.
rash man forbear, but for some unbelief,
my joy had been as fatal as my grief. jvaller.
her head was bare,
but for her native ornament of hair,
which in a simple knot was ty'd above. dryden.
when the fair boy receiv'd the gift of right,
and, but for mischi, f, you had dy'd for spight. dryden.
but. n. s. shout, french j a boundary.
but, if i ask you what i mean by that word. vou will answer,
i mean this or that thing, you cannot tell which ; but if join
it with the words in construction and sense, as, but i will not,
a but of wine, but and boundary, the ram will but, shoot at
but, the meaning of it will be as ready to you as any other
word. h. dor.
but. n.s. [in sea language.] the end of any plank which joins
to another on the outside of a ship, under water. harris.
but-end. m. s. [fictm but and end. the blunt end of any
thing; the end upon which it rests.
the reserve of foot galled their foot with several vollies, and
then fell on them with the but ends of their muskers.
carendon:
thy weapon was a good one when i wielded it, but the
but-end remains in my hands. arbuthnot.
some of the soldiers accordingly pushed them forwards with
the but-ends of their pikes, into my reach. swift.
butcher... n.s.. [boucher, fr.]
i. one that kills animals to sell their flesh.
the shepherd and the butcher both may look upon one sheep
with pleasing conceits. sidoy.
hence he learnt the butcher's guile,
how to cut your throat, and snile ;
like a butcher doom'd for life
in his mouth to wear his knife.
2. one that is delighted with blood.
honour and renown are bestowed on conquerors, who, for
the most part, are but the great butchers of mankind. locke.
to bu’rch er. v. a. [from the noun.] to kill; to murder.
in suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter’d,
thou shewest the naked pathway to thy life,
teaching stern murder how to batcher thee.
uncharitably with me have you dealt,
and shamefully by you my hopes are butcher'd. shakes care.
the poison and the dagger are at hand to butcher a hero,
when the poet wants brains to save him. dryden.
butch ers- b room, or kn e e holly, n. s. [ruseus, lat.]
the roots are sometimes used in medicine, and the green
shoots are cut and bound into bundles, and sold to the but-
chers, who use it as besoms to sweep their blocks; from
whence it had the name of butchers-broom. a filler.
butcherliness. m. s. [fiom butchery..] a brutal, cruel, sa-
vage, butcherly manner.
bu’rcherly. adj. [from butcher.] cruel; bloody; barbarous.
there is a way which, brought into schools, would take
swift.
shakespeare.
away this butcherly fear in making of latin. aftham.
what stratagems, how fell, how butchery,
this deadly quarrel daily doth beget ! shakesheare.
butchery. m. s. [from butcher.]
1. the trade of a butcher.
yet this man, so ignorant in modern butchery, has cut up
half an hundred heroes, and quartered five or six miserable
lovers, in every tragedy he has written. pate.
2. murder ; cruelty; slaughter. *
if thou delight to view thy heinous deeds, -
behold this pattern of thy butcheries. shakeshcare,
the butchery, and the breach of hospitality, is represented
in this fable under the mask of friendship. l'asirange.
can he a son to soft remorse incite,
whom gaols, and blood, and butchery dclight dryden.
3. the place where animals are killed ; where blood is shed.
this is no place, this house is but a butchery;
abhor it, fear it, do not enter it. shak speare.
butler, n. s. [bouteiler, fr. botler, or botaler, old eng-
lish, from bottle; he that is employed in the care of bottling
o a servant in a family employed in furnishing the
table.
butlers forget to bring up their beer time enough. swift.
butlerage. m. s. [from butler j the duty upon wines in-
ported, claimed by the king's butler.
those ordinary finances are casual or uncertain, as be the
escheats, the customs, butlerage, and impost. iłaczn.
but lership. m. s. [from butler.] the office of a butler.
bus tment, n. s. salcutement, fr.] that part of the arch which
joins it to the upright pier.
the supporters or butments of the said arch cannot suffer so
much violence, as in the precedent flat posture. /?otton.
but shaft. m. s. [from but and soft.j an arrow.
the blind boy's boost.
butt. m. s. shut, fr j
1. the place on which the mark to be shot at is placed.
he calls on bacchus and propounds the prize;
the groom his fellow groom at butts desies,
shakespeare.
and bends his bow, and levels with his eyes. drydn.
2. the point at which the endeavour is directed.
be not afraid though you do see me weapon'd;
here is my journey's end; here is my butt,
the very sea-mark of my journey's end. shakespeare.
3. the object of aim ; the thing against which any attack is
directed.
the papists were the most common-place, and the butt
against whom all the arrows were directed. carendon.
4. a
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 320</div><p class="text">b u t'
b u x
4. a man upon whom the company breaks their jests.
i played a sentence or two at my butt, which i thought very
smart, when my ill genius suggested to him such a reply as
got all the laughter on his fide. spectator.
5. a blow given by a horned animal.
6. a stroke given in fencing.
if disputes arise
among the champions for the prize;
to prove who gave the fairer butt,
john shews the chalk on robert’s coat. prior.
burr. m. s. [butz, saxon.] ... a vessel; a barrel containing one
hundred and twenty-six gallons of wine; a butt contains one
hundred and eight gallons of beer; and from fifteen to twenty-
two hundred weight is a butt of currans.
i escaped upon a butt of sack, which the sailors heaved
over-board. shakespeare.
t, butt. v. a. [botten, dutch..] to strike with the head.
come, leave your tears: a brief farewel: the beast
with many heads butts me away. shakespeare.
nor wars are seen,
unless, upon the green, -
two harmless lambs are butting one the other. wotton.
a snow-white steer, before thy altar led,
butts with his threatening brows, and bellowing stands.
dryden’s afneid.
a ram will butt with his head though he be brought up
tame, and never saw that manner of fighting. ray.
butter. m. s. [buttene, sax. butyrum, lat.]
1. an unetuous substance made by agitating the cream of milk,
till the oil separates from the whey. -
and he took butter and milk, and the calf which he had
dressed, and set before them. genosis, xviii. 8.
2. butter of antimony. a chymical preparation, made by unit-
ing the acid spirits of sublimate corrosive with regulus of anti-
mony. it is a great caustick. harris.
3. butter of tin, is made with tin and sublimate corrosive. this
preparation continually emits fumes. harris.
to bu’tter. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to smear, or oil with butter.
'twas her brother, that, in pure kindness to his horse,
buttered his hay. shakespeare.
words butter no parsnips. l'e/trange.
2. to encrease the stakes every throw, or every game: a cant
term among gamesters.
it is a fine simile in one of mr. congreve's prologues,
which compares a writer to a butter ing gamester, that stakes
all his winning upon one cast; so that if he loses the last
throw, he is sure to be undone. addison.
but ter bump. m. s. a fowl; the same with bittourn.
but tereur. n. s. [petastes, lat.] a plant used in medicine,
and grows wild in great plenty by the sides of ditches.
- miller.
bu'tterf low er. m. s. a yellow flower, with which the fields
abound in the month of may.
let weeds instead of butterflow’rs appear,
and meads, instead of daisies, hemlock bear. gay.
butter fly. m. s. [buzzeriple;e, saxon.] a beautiful insect,
so named because it first appears in the beginning of the season
for butter.
effoons that damsel, by her heav'nly might,
she turned into a winged butterfly,
in the wide air to make her wand'ring flight.
tell old tales, and laugh
at gilded butterflies; and hear poor rogues
talk of court news.
and so befel that as he cast his eye
among the colworts on a butterfly,
he saw false reynard. dryden.
that which seems to be a powder upon the wings of a bat-
terfly, is an innumerable company of extreme small feathers,
not to be discerned without a microscope. grew.
butter is. n.s. an instrument of steel set in a wooden handle,
used in paring the foot, or cutting the hoof of a horse.
farrier’s dictionary.
bu'ttermilk. m. s. [from butter and milk.] the whey that is
separated from the cream when butter is made.
a young man, fallen into an ulcerous consumption, devoted
himself to buttermilk, by which sole diet he recovered. harvey.
the scurvy of mariners is cured by acids; as fruits, lemons,
oranges, buttermilk; and alkaline spirits hurt them. a buth.
burt er print. n.s. [from butter and print.] a piece of carv-
ed wood, used to mark butter.
a lutterprint, in which were engraven figures of all sorts and
sizes, applied to the lump of butter, left on it the figure. locke.
bus tter root h. n.s. [from butter and tooth...] the great broad
forcteeth. -
butte rwoman. m. s. [from butter and woman.] a woman
that sells butter. -
tongue, i must put you into a butterwoman's mouth, and
buy myself another of bajazet's mute, if you prattle me into
these perils. shakoshcare.
butterwort. n.s. a plant: the same with sonicle.
spensor.
shakspeare.
bu’rt ery. adj. [from butter.] having the appearance or qua-
lities of butter.
nothing more convertible into hot cholerick humours than
its buttery parts. harvey.
the best oils, thickened by cold, have a white colour; and
milk itself has its whiteness from the caseous fibres, and its
buttery oil. floyer.
bu'ttery. m. s. [from butter; or, according to sainner, from
bouter, fr. to place or lay up.] the room where provisions
are laid up.
go, firrah, take them to the buttery,
and give them friendly welcome every one. shakes rare.
all that need a cool and fresh temper, as cellars, pantries,
and butteries, to the north. j/otion.
my guts ne'er suffer'd from a college-cook,
my name ne'er enter'd in a buttery book. bramffon.
buttock. m. s. [supposed, by skinner, to come from aboutir,
fr. inserted by junius without etymology.] the rump; the
part near the tail. -
it is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks. shakespeare.
such as were not able to stay themselves, should be holden
up by others of more strength, riding behind them upon the
buttocks of the horse. knolles.
the tail of a fox was never made for the buttocks of an ape.
l'e/orange's fables.
button. m. s. [bottwm, welch; bouton, fr.]
1. a catch, or small ball, by which the dress of man is fastened.
pray you, undo this button. shakespeare.
i mention those ornaments, because of the simplicity of the
shape, want of ornaments, buttons, loops, gold and filver lace,
they must have been cheaper than ours. arbuthnot.
2. any knob or ball fastened to a smaller body.
we fastened to the marble certain wires, and a button. boyle.
fair from its humble bed i rear'd this flow'r,
suckled and chear'd, with air, and sun and show'r;
soft on the paper ruff its leaves i spread,
bright with the gilded button tipt its head. pope.
3. the bud of a plant.
the canker galls the infants of the spring,
too oft before their buttons be disclos’d. shakespeare.
bu’tton. n.s. [echinus marinus.] the sea urchin, which is a
kind of crabfish that has prickles instead of feet. ainsworth.
to button. v. a. [from the noun.]
1. to dress; to clothe.
one whose hard heart is button'd up with steel. shakespeare.
he gave his legs, arm, and breast, to his ordinary servant,
to button and dress him. j/attan.
2. to fastem with buttons; as, he buttons his coat.
button hole. m. s. [from button and hole.] the loop in which
the button of the clothes is caught.
let me take you a buttonhole lower.
i'll please the maids of honour, if i can :
without black velvet breeches, what is man :
i will my skill in buttonholes display,
and brag, how oft i shift me ev'ry day.
buttress. m. s. [from aboutir, fr.]
1. a prop; a wall built to support another wall, and standing
out.
shakespeare.
bram/?on.
no jutting frize,
buttress, not coigne of vantage, but this bird,
hath made his pendant bed, and procreant cradle. shakes?.
fruit trees, set upon a wall against the sun, between elbows
or buttresses of stone, ripen more than upon a plain wall. bacon.
but we inhabit a weak city here,
which buttresses and props but scarcely bear.
2. a prop; a support.
it will concern us to examine the force of this plea, which
our adversaries are still setting up against us, as the ground pil-
lar and buttress of the good old cause of nonconformity. south.
70 buttr ess. v. a. [from the noun..] to prop; to support.
but wi nk. m. s. the name of a bird. ' dic7.
butyraceous. adj. [butyrum, lat, butter.] having the qua-
lities of butter.
chyle has the same principles as milk; a viscidity from the
caseous parts, and an oiliness from the butyraceous parts. foyer.
but y rous. adj. [butyrum, latin.] having the properties of
butter. -
its oily red part is from the butyrous parts of chyle. foyer.
bu'xom. adj. [bucrum, sax, from bugan, to bend. it ori-
ginally signified obedient, as john de trevisa, a clergyman, tells
his patron, that he is obedient and buxom to all his commands.
in an old form of marriage used before the reformation, the
bride promised to be obedient and buxom in bed and at board;
from which expression, not well understood, its present mean-
ing seems to be derived.]
i. obedient; obsequious.
he did tread down, and disgrace all the english, and set up
and countenance the irish; thinking thereby to make them
dryden.
more tractable and buxom to his government. sjensor.
- he, with broad sails,
winnow'd the buxom air. milton.
2. gay ; lively; brisk.
7
i'm
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 321</div><p class="text">e u 27.
b y
i’m born
again a fresh child of the boom morn,
te - - -
her of the sun's first beams. crasaw.
zephyr, with aurora playing,
as he met her once a maying,
fill'd her with thee, a daughter fair,
so luxom, blithe, and debonnair. milton.
sturdy swains,
in cle, n array, for rustick dance prepare,
mixt with the buxom damsels hand in hand. phillips.
3. wanton; jolly.
almighty jove descends, and pours
into his buxom bride his fruitful show’rs. dryden.
she feigned the rites of bacchus' cry’d aloud,
and to the buxom god the virgin vow'd. dryden.
bu’xom ly. adv. [from buxom.] wantonly ; amorously.
buxomness. n. s. [from buxom.] wantonness; amorous-
ness.
to buy. v. a. preter. i bought ; i have bought. [biczean, sax.]
1. to purchase ; to acquire by paying a price; to obtain for
money, or something equivalent; to procure by sale, not gift
or theft.
they must buy up no corn growing within twelve miles of
geneva, that so the filling of their magazines may not preju-
dice their market. - aadison.
2. to procure some advantage by something that deserves it, or
at some price.
i have bought
golden opinions from all sorts of people. shakespeare.
pent to linger
but with a grain a day. i would not buy
their mercy at the price of one fair word. shakespeare.
pleasure with praise, and danger they would buy,
and with a foe that would not only fly. denham.
3. to regulate by money: in this sense it has particles an-
nexed.
you, and all the kings of christendom,
are led so grossly by this meddling priest,
dreading the curse that money may buy out. shakespeare.
what pitiful things are power, rhetorick, or riches, when
they would terrify, dissuade, or buy off conscience 2 south.
to buy. v. n. to treat about a purchase.
i will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk
with you, and so following. shakespeare.
bu'yer. m. s. [from to buy..] he that buys; a purchaser.
when a piece of art is set before us, let the first caution be,
not to ask who made it, lest the fame of the author do capti-
vate the fancy of the buyer. . j}otton.
to buzz. v. n. [bizzen, teut. to growl. junius.]
1. to hum; to make a noise like bees, flies, or wasps.
and all the chamber filled was with flies,
which buzzed all about, and made such sound,
that they encumber'd all men's ears and eyes,
like many swarms of bees assembled round. spensor.
there be more wasps, that buzz about his nose,
will make this sting the sooner. shakespeare.
for still the flowers ready stand, -
cne buzzes round about,
one lights, one tastes, gets in, gets out. . suckling.
what though no bees around your cradle flew,
mor on your lips distill'd their golden dew ;
yet have we oft discover'd, in their stead, -
a swarm of drones that buzz'd about your head. pope.
we join, like flies and wasps, in buzzing about wit. swift.
2. to whisper; to prate to.
there is such confusion in my pow'rs,
as after some oration fairly spoke
. by a beloved prince, there doth appear
among the buzzing multitude. * . shakespeare.
3. to sound heavy and low:
herewith arose a buzzing noise among them, as if it had
been the rustling sound of the sea afar off. hayward.
to buzz. v. a. to whisper; to spread secretly.
where doth the world thrust forth a vanity,
that is not quickly buzz'd into his ears? shakespeare.
i will buzz abroad such prophecies,
that edward shall be fearful of his life. shakespeare.
did you not hear -
a buzzing of a separation
between the king and catherine : shakespeare.
they might buzz and whisper it one to another, and, ta-
citly withdrawing from the presence of the apostles, they then
lift their voices, and noise it about the city. bently.
buzz. n.s.. [from the verb.] a hum; a whisper; a talk.
the hive of a city or kingdom is in best condition when
there is least noise or buzz in it. bacon.
where i found the whole outward room in a buzz of po-
liticks. addison.
bu’zzard. m. s. [busard, fr.]
1. a degenerate or mean species of hawk.
more pity that the eagle should be mawl’d,
while kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
shakosheart.
vol. i.
the noble buzzard ever pleas'd me best;
of small renown, 'tis true: for, not to lie,
we call him but a hawk by courtesy. dryden,
2. a blockhead; a dunce.
those blind buzzard, who, in late years, of wilful malici-
ousness, would neither learn themselves, nor could teach others
any thing at all. æschool.
buzz er. n.s. (from buzz.] a secret whisperer.
her brother is in secret come from france,
and wants not buzzers to infest his ear
with petulant speeches of his father's death. shakespeare.
by. prep. [bi, box, saxon.}
i. it notes the agent.
the moor is with child by you, launcelot. shakesp.
the grammar of a language is sometimes to be carefusly
studied by a grown man. locke.
death's what the guilty fear, the pious crave,
sought by the wretch, and vanquish’d by the brave. garth.
2. it notes the instrument, and is commonly used after a verb
neuter, where with would be put after an active; as, he killed
her with a sword; she died by a sword.
butly pelides' arms when hector fell,
he chose aeneas, and he chose as well. dryden.
3. it notes the cause of any effect.
i view, by no presumption led,
your revels of the night. parnel.
by woe the soul to daring action steals,
by woe in plaintless patience it excels. savage.
4. it notes the means by which any thing is performed, or ob-
tained.
you must think, if we give you anything, we hope to gain
by you. shakespeare.
happier had it suffic’d him to have known
good by itself, and evil not at all. paradis, loft.
the heart knows that by itself, which nothing in the world
besides can give it any knowledge of. south.
we obtain the knowledge of a multitude of propositions by
sensation and refle&amp;tion. //atts's logick.
5. it shews the manner of an action.
i have not patience; she consumes the time
in idle talk, and owns her false belief:
seize her by force, and bear her hence unheard. dryden.
this fight had more weight with him, as by good luck not
above two of that venerable body were fallen asleep. addison.
by chance, within a neighbouring brook,
he saw his branching horns, and alter'd look. addison.
6. it has a signification, noting the method in which any succes-
five action is performed, with regard to time or quantity.
the best for you, is to re-examine the cause, and to try it
even point by point, argument by argument, with all the exact-
ness you can. - hooker.
we are not to stay all together but to come by him where
he stands, by ones, by twos, and by threes. shakespeare.
he calleth them forth by one, and by one, by the name, as he
pleaseth, though seldom the order be inverted. bacon.
the captains were obliged to break that piece of ordnance,
and so by pieces to carry it away, that the enemy should not get
so great a spoil. -
common prudence would dire&amp;t me to take them all out,
and examine them one by one. boyle.
others will soon take pattern and encouragement by your
building ; and so house by house, street by street, there will at
last be finished a magnificent city. spratt.
explor’d her, limb by limb, and fear'd to find
so rude a gripe had left a livid mark behind. dryden.
thus year by year they pass, and day by day,
till once ’twas on the morn of chearful may,
the young aemilia dryden.
i'll gaze for ever on thy godlike father,
transplanting one by one into my life,
his bright perfections, till i shine like him. addison.
let the blows be by pauses laid on. locke.
7. it notes the quantity had at one time.
bullion will sell by the ounce for six shillings and five-pence
unclipped money. locke.
what we take daily by pounds, is at least of as much impor-
tance as what we take seldom, and only by grains and spoon-
fuls. arbuthnot.
the north, by myriads, pours her mighty sons;
great nurse of goths, of alans, and of huns. pope.
8. at, or in ; noting place: it is now perhaps only used before
the words sea, or water, and land. this seems a remnant of
a meaning now hittle known. by once expressed situation; as,
by wesi, westward.
we see the great effects of battles by sea; the battle of ac-
tium decided the empire of the world. bacon.
arms, and the man, i sing, who, forc’d by fate,
expell’d, and exil'd, left the trojan shore; -
long labours both by sea and land he bore. dryden.
i would have fought by land, where i was stronger:
you hinder'd it; yet, when i fought at sea,
forsook me fighting. dryden.
3 t by
anoles.
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 322</div><p class="text">b y
b y c
by land, by water, they renew their charge. pope.
. according to ; noting permission.
it is lawful, both by the laws of nature and nations, and by
the law divine, which is the perfeotion of the other two.
bacon's holy war.
10. according to; noting proof.
the present, or like, system of the world cannot possibly
have been eternal, by the first proposition; and, without god,
it could not naturally, nor fortuitously, emerge out of chaos,
by the third proposition. bentley.
the faculty, or desire, being infinite, by the preceding
proposition, may contain or receive both these. cheyne.
11. after; according to ; noting imitation or conformity.
the gospel gives us such laws, as every man, that under-
stands himself, would chuse to live by. tillotson.
in the divisions i have made, i have endeavoured, the best i
could, to govern myself by the diversity of matter. locke.
this ship, by good luck, fell into their hands at last, and
served as a model to build others by. arbuthnot.
12. from ; noting ground of judgment, or comparison.
thus, by the musick, we may know,
when noble wits a hunting go,
through groves that on parnassus grow. j/aller.
by what he has done, before the war in which he was en-
gaged, we may expect what he will do after a peace. dryden.
the son of hercules he justly seems,
by his broad shoulders and gigantick limbs. dryden.
who's that stranger ? by his warlike port,
his fierce demeanour, and erected look,
he's of no vulgar note. dryden.
judge the event
by what has pass'd. dryden.
the punishment is not to be measured by the greatness or
finallness of the matter, but by the opposition it carries and
stands in, to that respect and submission that is due to the
father. locke.
by your description of the town, i imagine it to lie under
some great enchantment. pope.
by what i have always heard and read, i take the strength
of a nation— swift.
13. it notes the sum of the difference between two things com-
pared.
meantime she stands provided of a laius,
more young and vigorous too by twenty springs. dryden.
her brother rivers,
ere this, lies shorter by the head at pomfret. rowe.
by giving the denomination to less quantities of silver by one
twentieth, you take from them their due. locke.
14. it notes co-operation.
by her he had two children at one birth. shakespeare.
15. for; noting continuance of time. this sense is not now in
use.
ferdinand and isabella recovered the kingdom of granada
from the moors; having been in possession thereof by the space
of seven hundred years. bacon.
16. as soon as ; not later than ; noting time.
by this, the sons of constantine which fled,
ambrise and uther, did ripe years attain.
hector, by the fifth hour of the sun,
will, with a trumpet, 'twixt our tents and troy,
to-morrow morning call some knight to arms. shakosh.
he err'd not ; for, by this, the heav'nly bands
down from a sky of jasper lighted now
in paradise. milton.
these have their course to finish round the earth
by morrow ev’ning. milton's paradise loft.
the angelick guards ascended, mute and sad
for man: for, of his state by this they knew. paradise lost.
by that time a siege is carried on two or three days, i am al-
together lost and bewildered in it. addison.
by this time, the very foundation was removed. swift.
by the beginning of the fourth century from the building of
rome, the tribunes proceeded so far, as to accuse and fine the
consuls. - swift.
17. beside ; noting passage.
many beautiful places standing along the sea-shore, make
the town appear longer than it is, to those that sail by it.
- addison.
18. beside; near to ; in presence; noting proximity of place.
so thou may’st say, the king lies by a beggar, if a beggar
dwell near him; or the church stands by thy tabour, if thy
talour stand by the church. shakespeare.
here he comes himself;
if he be worth any man's good voice,
that good man sit down by him.
a spacious plain, whereon
were tents of various hue: by some, were herds
fairy queen.
ben. johnson.
of cattle grazing. milton.
stay by me; thou art resolute and faithful;
i have employment worthy of thy arm. dryden.
19. before himself, herself, or themselves, it notes the absence of
all others.
sitting in some place, by himself, let him translate into fin-
glish his former lesson. ascham.
solyman resolved to assault the breach, after he had, by him-
fels, in a melancholy mood, walked up and down in his tent.
knolles': history of the turks.
i know not whether he will annex his discourse to his appen-
dix, or publish it by itself, or at all. boyle.
he will imagine, that the king, and his ministers, sat down
and made them by themselves, and then sent them to their al-
lies, to sign. swift.
more pleas'd to keep it, till their friends could come,
than eat the sweetest by themselves at home. pope.
20. at hand.
he kept then some of the spirit by him, to verify what he
believes. boyle,
the merchant is not forced to keep so much money by him,
as in other places, where they have not such a supply. locł.
21. it is the solemn form of swearing.
his godhead i invoke, by him i swear. dryden.
22. it is used in forms of adjuring, or obtesting.
which, o ! avert by yon etherial light,
which i have lost for this eternal night;
or if, by dearer ties, you may be won,
by your dead fire, and by your living son. dryden.
now by your joys on earth, your hopes in heav'n,
o spare this great, this good, this aged king ! dryden,
o, cruel youth !
by all the pain that wrings my tortur’d soul!
by all the dear deceitful hopes you gave me,
o. cease! at least, once more delude my sorrows. smith,
23. it signifies specification and particularity.
upbraiding heav'n, from whence his lineage came,
and cruel calls the gods, and cruel thee, by name. dryden.
24. by proxy of; noting substitution.
the gods were said to feast with ethiopians; that is, they
were present with them by their statues. broome.
25. in the same direction with. -
they are also striated, or furrowed, by the length, and the
sides curiously punched, or pricked. grew.
by. adv.
1. near ; at a small distance.
and in it lies, the god of sleep;
and, snorting by,
we may descr
the monsters of the deep. dryden.
2. beside ; passing.
i did hear
the galloping of horse. who was’t came by? shałoff.
3. in presence.
the same words in my lady philoclea's mouth, as from one
woman to another, so as there was no other body ly, might
have had a better grace. sidney:
i’ll not be by, the while; my liege, farewel :
what will become hereof, there's none can tell. shakesh;
there while i fing, if gentle youth be by, -
that tunes my lute, and winds the strings so high. waller,
pris'ners and witnesses were waiting by ;
these had been taught to swear, and those to die. roscom.
you have put a principle into him, which will influence his
actions, when you are not by. locke.
by and by. in a short time. " .
he overtook amphialus, who had been staid here, and by
and by called him to fight with him. sidney.
the noble knight alighted by and by,
from lofty steed, and bad the lady stay,
to see what end of fight should him befall that day. spensor.
in the temple, by and by, with us,
these couples shall eternally be knit.
o how this spring of love resembleth
the uncertain glory of an april day;
which now shews all the beauty of the sun,
and by and by a cloud takes all away. shakespeare.
now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a beast.
shakesp. othello.
by. n.s.. [from the preposition.] something not the direct and
immediate object of regard.
in this instance, there is, upon the by, to be noted, the per-
shakespeare.
colation of the verjuice through the wood. bacon.
this wolf was forced to make bold, ever and anon, with a
sheep in private, by the by. l’estrange.
hence we may understand, to add that upon the ly, that it
is not necessary. boyle.
so, while my lov’d revenge is full and high,
i'll give you back your kingdom by the ly. dryden.
by, in composition, implies something out of the direct way;
and, consequently, some obscurity, as a by-road; something
irregular, as a by-end; or something collateral, as a ly-concern-
ment ; or private, as a by-law. this composition is used at
pleasure, and will be understood by the examples following.
by-coff e e house. n.s. a coffeehouse in an obscure place.
| afterwards entered a by-coffeehouse, that stood at the upper
end of a narrow lanc, where i met with a nonjuror. addison
-
</p></div><div class="page"><div class="seq">page 323</div><p class="text">b y r
b y z
!
*
o
i.
by-concernment. n.s. an affair which is not the main bu-
siness-
our plays, besides the main design, have under-plots, or by-
concernments, or less considerable persons and intrigues, which
are carried on with the motion of the main plot. dryden.
by-dependen ce. n.s. an appendage; something accidentally
depending on another.
these,
and your three motives to the battle, with
i know not how much more, should be demanded ;
and all the other by-dependencies,
from chance to chance.
by-design. m. s. an incidental purpose.
and if she miss the mouse-trap lines,
they’ll serve for other by designs,
and make an artist understand,
to copy out her seal or hand;
or find void places in the paper,
to steal in something to entrap her. hudibras.
by-end. m. s. private interest; secret advantage.
all people that worship for fear, profit, or some other by-
shakespeare.
*
end, fall within the intendment of this fable. l'estrange.
by-gone. adj. [a scotch word.] past.
tell him, you're sure
all in bohemia's well: this satisfaction
the by-gone day proclaim’d. shakespeare.
as we have a conceit of motion coming, as well as by-gone;
so have we of time, which dependeth thereupon. grew.
by-interest. n. s. interest distinet from that of the publick.
various factions and parties, all aiming at by-interes', with -
out any sincere regard to the publick good. attorbury.
by-law. n. s.
by-laws are orders made in court-leets, or court-barons, by
common assent, for the good of those that make them, farther
than the publick law binds. cowel.
there was also a law, to restrain the by-laws and ordinances
of corporations. bacon.
in the beginning of this record is inserted the law or institu-
tion; to which are added two by-laws, as a comment upon
the general law. addison.
by-matter. m. s. something incidental.
i knew one, that, when he wrote a letter, he would put that
which was most material into the postscript, as if it had been a
by-matter. bacon.
by-name. m. s. a nick-name; name of reproach, or acciden-
tal appellation.
robert, eldest son to the conquerour, used short hose, and
thereupon was by-named court-hose, and shewed first the use
of them to the english. camden.
by-past, adj. past; a term of the scotch diale&amp;t.
wars, pestilences, and diseases, have not been fewer for these
three hundred years by-pas, than ever they had been since we
have had records. - cheyne.
by-path. n.s. a private or obscure path.
heav'n knows, my son,
by what by-paths, and indirect crook’d ways,
- i got this crown.
by-r espect. n.s. private end or view.
it may be that some, upon by-respesis, find somewhat friend-
ly usage in usance, at some of their hands. carew.
the archbishops and bishops, next under the king, have the
government of the church : be not you the mean to prefer any
to those places, for any ly-rospects, but only for their learning,
gravity, and worth. bacon.
augustus, who was not altogether so good as he was wise,
had some by-respects in the enaeling of this law; for to do any
thing for nothing, was not his maxim. drydon.
by-ro ad. m. s. an obscure unfrequented path.
shakoffeare.
through slipp'ry ly-roads, dark and deep,
they often climb, and often creep. sws.
by-room.. n. s. a private room within another.
i pr’ythee, do thou stand in some by-room, while i question
my puny drawer to what end he gave the sugar. shakesp.
by-speech. n.s. an incidental or casual speech, not directly
relating to the point.
when they come to allege what word and what law they
meant, their common ordinary practice is to quote ly-speeches,
in some historical narration or other, and to use them as if they
were written in most exact form of law. hocker.
by-sta n der. m. s. a looker on ; one unconcerned.
she broke her feathers, and, falling to the ground, was
taken up by the by-standers. l'e//range.
the by-/landers asked him, why he ran away, his bread being
weight locke.
by-street. n.s. an obscure street.
the broker here his spicious beaver wears,
upon his brow fit jealousies and cares;
bent on some mortgage, to avoid reproach,
he secks by://reets, and saves the expensive coach. gy.
by-view. m. s. private self interested purpose.
no by-views of his own shall mislead him. 4:terbury.
by-w al k. m. s. a private walk; not the main road.
he moves afterwards in hy-walks, or under-plots, as diver-
sons to the main design, left it should grow tedious; though
they are still naturally joined. * dryden.
the chief avenue ought to be the most ample and noble;
but there should be by-walks, to retire into sometimes, for ease
and refreshment. broome.
by-way. m. s. a private and obscure way.
night stealths are commonly driven in ly-ways, and by blind
fords, unused of any but such like. spenser on ireland.
other by-way; he himself betook,
where never foot of living wight did tread. spenser.
wholly abstain, or wed: thy beauteous lord
allows thee choice of paths ; take no by-ways,
but gladly welcome what he doth afford;
not grudging that thy lust hath bounds and stays. herbert.
a servant, or a favourite, if he be in want, and no other
apparent cause of esteem, is commonly thought but a by-way
to close corruption. bacon.
this is wonderfully diverting to the understanding, thus to
receive a precept, as it were, through a by-way, and to appre-
hend an idea that draws a whole train after it. addison.
by-west. n. s. westward; to the west of.
whereupon grew that by-word, used by the irish, that they
dwelt by-west the law, which dwelt beyond the river of the
barrow. - davies on ireland.
by-word. m. s. a saying; a proverb.
bashful henry be deposed; whose cowardice
hath made us by-words to our enemies. shakespeare.
i knew a wise man, that had it for a by-word, when he saw
men hasten to a conclusion, stay a little, that we may make an
end the sooner. bacon.
we are become a by-word among the nations for our ridi-
culous feuds and animosities. addison.
it will be his lot often, to look singular, in loose and licen-
tious times, and to become a by-word and a reproach, among
the men of wit and pleasure. 4tterbury.
by'ass. n.s. see bia's.
every inordinate lust is a false byos, upon men's understand-
ings, which naturally draws towards atheism. tillotson.
by e, or bee, come immediately from the saxon, by, bying,
i. e. a dwelling. gibson.
by'zantine. see biz ant ine. byzantire is the true ortho-
graphy.

alphasectend
